Chemical Reactions
and Equations1 CHAPTER
Consider the following situations of daily life and think what happens
when –
milk is left at room temperature during summers.
an iron tawa/pan/nail is left exposed to humid atmosphere.
grapes get fermented.
food is cooked.
food gets digested in our body.
we respire.
In all the above situations, the nature and the identity of the initial
substance have somewhat changed. W e have alr eady lear nt about physical
and chemical changes of matter in our previous classes. Whenever a chemical
change occurs, we can say that a chemical reaction has taken place.
You may per haps be wondering as to what is actually meant by a
chemical reaction. How do we come to know that a chemical reaction
has taken place? Let us perform some activities to find the answer to
these questions.
Burning of a magnesium ribbon in air and collection of magnesium
oxide in a watch-glassCAUTION: This the teacher’s assistance. It
would be better if students
wear suitable eyeglasses.
Clean a magnesium ribbon
about - cm long by rubbing
it with sandpaper .
Hold it with a pair of tongs.
Burn it using a spirit lamp or
burner and collect the ash so
formed in a watch-glass as
shown in Fig. . Burn the
magnesium ribbon keeping it
away as far as possible from
your eyes.
What do you observe?“Facts are not science — as the dictionary is not literature.”
Martin H. Fischer
Formation of hydrogen
gas by the action of
dilute sulphuric acid on
zincFrom the above three activities, we can say that any of
the following observations helps us to determine whether
a chemical reaction has taken place –
change in state
change in colour
evolution of a gas
change in temperature.
As we observe the changes around us, we can see
that there is a large variety of chemical reactions taking
place ar ound us. W e will study about the various types
of chemical reactions and their symbolic representation
in this Chapter .Take a few zinc granules in a conical flask or a test tube.
Add dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid to this
(Fig. .).
CAUTION: Handle the acid with care.
Do you observe anything happening around the zinc
granules?
Touch the conical flask or test tube. Is there any change in
its temperature?Take lead nitrate
solution in a test
tube.
Add potassium
iodide solution
to this.
What do you
observe?
. CHEMIC1. CHEMIC1. CHEMIC1. CHEMIC1. CHEMIC AL EQUAAL EQUAAL EQUA AL EQUAAL EQUA TIONS TIONSTIONS TIONSTIONS
oxygen, it gets converted to magnesium oxide. This description of a
chemical reaction in a sentence form is quite long. It can be written in a
shorter form. The simplest way to do this is to write it in the form of a
word-equation.
The word-equation for the above reaction would be –
Magnesium + Oxygen →Magnesium oxide (.)
(Reactants) (Product)
The substances that undergo chemical change in the reaction (.),
magnesium and oxygen, are the reactants. The new substance is
magnesium oxide, formed during the reaction, as a product.
A word-equation shows change of reactants to products through an
arrow placed between them. The reactants are written on the left-hand
side (LHS) with a plus sign (+) between them. Similarly, products are
written on the right-hand side (RHS) with a plus sign (+) between them.
The arrowhead points towards the products, and shows the direction of
the reaction.You must have observed that magnesium ribbon bur ns with a
dazzling white flame and changes into a white powder . This powder is
magnesium oxide. It is formed due to the reaction between magnesium
and oxygen present in the air .
Chemical Reactions and Equations . W riting a Chemical Equation
Is there any other shorter way for representing chemical equations?
Chemical equations can be made more concise and useful if we use
chemical formulae instead of words. A chemical equation represents a
chemical reaction. If you recall formulae of magnesium, oxygen and
magnesium oxide, the above word-equation can be written as –
Mg + O2 → MgO (.)
Count and compare the number of atoms of each element on the
LHS and RHS of the arrow. Is the number of atoms of each element the
same on both the sides? If yes, then the equation is balanced. If not,
then the equation is unbalanced because the mass is not the same on
both sides of the equation. Such a chemical equation is a skeletal
chemical equation for a reaction. Equation (.) is a skeletal chemical
equation for the bur ning of magnesium in air .
. Balanced Chemical Equations
Recall the law of conservation of mass that you studied in Class IX; mass
can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. That is, the
total mass of the elements present in the products of a chemical reaction
has to be equal to the total mass of the elements present in the reactants.
In other words, the number of atoms of each element remains the
same, before and after a chemical reaction. Hence, we need to balance a
skeletal chemical equation. Is the chemical Eq. (.) balanced? Let us
learn about balancing a chemical equation step by step.
The word-equation for Zinc + Sulphuric acid → Zinc sulphate + Hydrogen
The above word-equation may be represented by the following
chemical equation –
Zn + H2SO4 → ZnSO4 + H2(.)
Let us examine the number of atoms of different elements on both
sides of the arrow.
Element Number of atoms in Number of atoms
reactants (LHS) in products (RHS)
Zn
H
S
O
As the number of atoms of each element is the same on both sides of
the arrow, Eq. (.) is a balanced chemical equation.
Let us try to balance the following chemical equation –
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4 + H2(.)
formula. Do not change anything inside the boxes while balancing the
equation.
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4 + H2(.)
Step II: List the number of atoms of different elements present in the
unbalanced equation (.).
Element Number of atoms Number of atoms
in reactants (LHS) in products (RHS)
Fe
H
O
To equalise the number of atoms, it must be remembered that we
cannot alter the formulae of the compounds or elements involved in the
reactions. For example, to balance oxygen atoms we can put coefficient
‘’ as H2O and not H2O4 or (H2O). Now the partly balanced equation
become s–
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4 + H2
Step IV: Fe and H atoms ar e still not balanced. Pick any of these elements
to proceed further . Let us balance hydr ogen atoms in the partly balanced
equation.
To equalise the number of H atoms, make the number of molecules
of hydrogen as four on the RHS.Step III: It is often convenient to start balancing with the compound
that contains the maximum number of atoms. It may be a reactant or a
product. In that compound, select the element which has the maximum
number of atoms. Using these criteria, we select Fe3O4 and the element
oxygen in it. There are four oxygen atoms on the RHS and only one on
the LHS.
To balance the oxygen atoms –
The equation would be –
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4 + H2Atoms of In reactants In products
oxygen
(i)Initial (in H2O) (in Fe3O4)
(ii)To balance ×
Atoms of In reactants In products
hydrogen
(i)Initial (in H2O) (in H2)
(ii)To balance × (.)
(partly balanced equation)
(.)
(partly balanced equation)
Chemical Reactions and Equations 5To equalise Fe, we take three atoms of Fe on the LHS.
Fe + H2O → Fe3O4 + H2(.)
Step VI: Finally, to check the correctness of the balanced equation, we
count atoms of each element on both sides of the equation.
3Fe + 4H2O → Fe3O4 + 4H2
The numbers of atoms of elements on both sides of Eq. (.) are
equal. This equation is now balanced. This method of balancing chemical
equations is called hit-and-trial method as we make trials to balance
the equation by using the smallest whole number coefficient.
Step VII: Writing Symbols of Physical StatesWriting Symbols of Physical StatesWriting Symbols of Physical StatesWriting Symbols of Physical StatesWriting Symbols of Physical States Car efully examine
the above balanced Eq. (.). Does this equation tell us anything about
the physical state of each reactant and product? No information has
been given in this equation about their physical states.
To make a chemical equation more informative, the physical states
of the reactants and products are mentioned along with their chemical
formulae. The gaseous, liquid, aqueous and solid states of reactants
and products are represented by the notations (g), (l), (aq) and (s),
respectively. The word aqueous (aq) is written if the reactant or product
is present as a solution in water .
The balanced Eq. (.) becomes
3Fe(s) + 4H2O(g) → Fe3O4(s) + 4H2(g) (.)
Note that the symbol (g) is used with H2O to indicate that in this
reaction water is used in the form of steam.
Usually physical states are not included in a chemical equation unless
it is necessary to specify them.
Sometimes the reaction conditions, such as temperature, pressure,
catalyst, etc., for the reaction are indicated above and/or below the arrow
in the equation. For example –
CO(g) + 2H (g)
atmCH OH(l)  →  (.)
6CO (aq) 12H O(l) C H O (aq) 6O2 + +Sunlight
Chl
orophyll →   ( aq) 6H O(l)+ (.)
(Glucose)
Using these steps, can you balance Eq. (.) given in the text earlier?Step V: Examine the above equation and pick up the third element
which is not balanced. Y ou find that only one element is left to be
balanced, that is, iron.
Atoms of In reactants In products
iron
(i)Initial (in Fe) (in Fe3O4)
(ii)To balance ×
(.)
(balanced equation)
AL REAAL REA CTIONS CTIONSCTIONS CTIONSCTIONS
We have lear nt in Class IX that during a chemical r eaction atoms of one
element do not change into those of another element. Nor do atoms
disappear from the mixture or appear from elsewhere. Actually, chemical
reactions involve the breaking and making of bonds between atoms to
produce new substances. Y ou will study about types of bonds for med
between atoms in Chapters and .
. Combination Reaction
Take a small amount of calcium oxide
or quick lime in a beaker .
Slowly add water to this.
Touch the beaker as shown in Fig. .
Do you feel any change in temperature?
Formation of slaked
lime by the reaction of
calcium oxide with
waterCalcium oxide reacts vigorously with water to produce slaked lime
(calcium hydroxide) releasing a large amount of heat.
CaO(s) +H2O(l) → Ca(OH)(aq) + Heat (.)
(Quick lime) (Slaked lime)
In this reaction, calcium oxide and water combine to form a single
product, calcium hydroxide. Such a reaction in which a single product
is formed from two or more reactants is known as a combination reaction.. Why should a magnesium ribbon be cleaned before burning in air?
. Write the balanced equation for the following chemical r eactions.
(i)Hydrogen + Chlorine → Hydrogen chloride
(ii)Barium chloride + Aluminium sulphate → Barium sulphate +
Aluminium chloride
(iii)Sodium + W ater → Sodium hydr oxide + Hydr ogen
. Write a balanced chemical equation with state symbols for the
following reactions.
(i)Solutions of barium chloride and sodium sulphate in water react
to give insoluble barium sulphate and the solution of sodium
chloride.
(ii)Sodium hydroxide solution (in water) reacts with hydrochloric
acid solution (in water) to produce sodium chloride solution and
water .?
Chemical Reactions and Equations 7Let us discuss some more examples of combination reactions.
(i)Burning of coal
C(s) + O2(g) → CO2(g) (.)
(ii)Formation of water from H2(g) and O2(g)
2H2(g) + O2(g) → 2H2O(l) (.)
In simple language we can say that when two or more substances
(elements or compounds) combine to form a single product, the reactions
are called combination reactions.
In This makes the reaction mixture warm. Reactions in which heat is
released along with the formation of products are called exothermic
chemical reactions.
Other examples of exothermic reactions are –
(i)Burning of natural gas
CH4(g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g) (.)
(ii)Do you know that respiration is an exothermic process?
We all know that we need ener gy to stay alive. W e get this ener gy
from the food we eat. During digestion, food is broken down into simpler
substances. For example, rice, potatoes and bread contain
carbohydrates. These carbohydrates are broken down to form glucose.
This glucose combines with oxygen in the cells of our body and provides
energy. The special name of this reaction is respiration, the process of
which you will study in Chapter .
C6H12O6(aq) + 6O2(aq) → 6CO2(aq) + 6H2O(l) + energy (.)
(Glucose)
(iii) The decomposition of vegetable matter into compost is also an
example of an exothermic reaction.
Identify the type of the reaction taking place in heat is given out along with the formation of a single product.
Do Y ou Know?A solution of slaked lime produced by the reaction . is used for whitewashing
walls. Calcium hydroxide reacts slowly with the carbon dioxide in air to form a thin
layer of calcium carbonate on the walls. Calcium carbonate is formed after two to
three days of whitewashing and gives a shiny finish to the walls. It is interesting to note
that the chemical formula for marble is also CaCO3.
Ca(OH)(aq) + CO2(g) →CaCO3(s) + H2O(l) (.)
(Calcium (Calcium
hydroxide) carbonate)
Heating of lead nitrate and
emission of nitrogen dioxide
Correct way of heating
the boiling tube
containing crystals
of ferrous sulphate
and of smelling the
odour
nTake about g lead nitrate powder in a boiling
tube.
nHold the boiling tube with a pair of tongs and
heat it over a flame, as shown in Fig. .
nWhat do you observe? Note down the change,
if any.
You will observe the emission of brown fumes.
These fumes are of nitrogen dioxide (NO2). The
reaction that takes place is –nTake about g ferrous sulphate crystals
in a dry boiling tube.
nNote the colour of the ferrous sulphate
crystals.
nHeat the boiling tube over the flame of
a burner or spirit lamp as shown in
Fig. .
nObserve the colour of the crystals after
heating.
Have you noticed that the green colour of the ferrous sulphate crystals
has changed? You can also smell the characteristic odour of burning
sulphur.
2FeSO4(s) Heat →  Fe2O3(s) + SO2(g) + SO3(g) (.)
(Ferrous sulphate) (Ferric oxide)
In this reaction you can observe that a single reactant breaks down
to give simpler products. This is a decomposition reaction. Ferrous
sulphate crystals (FeSO4. 7H2O) lose water when heated and the colour
of the crystals changes. It then decomposes to ferric oxide (Fe2O3),
sulphur dioxide (SO2) and sulphur trioxide (SO3). Ferric oxide is a solid,
while SO2 and SO3 are gases.
Decomposition of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide and carbon
dioxide on heating is an important decomposition reaction used in
various industries. Calcium oxide is called lime or quick lime. It has
many uses – one is in the manufacture of cement. When a decomposition
reaction is carried out by heating, it is called thermal decomposition.
CaCO3(s) Heat →  CaO(s) + CO2(g) (.)
(Limestone) (Quick lime)
Another example of a thermal decomposition reaction is given
in
Chemical Reactions and Equations 9999nTake about g silver chloride in a china dish.
nWhat is its colour?
nPlace this china dish in sunlight for some time
(Fig. .).
nObserve the colour of the silver chloride after some
time.
Silver chloride turns grey
in sunlight to form silver
metalYou will see that white silver chloride turns grey in sunlight. This is
due to the decomposition of silver chloride into silver and chlorine by
light.
2AgCl(s) Sunlight → 2Ag(s) + Cl2(g) (.)nTake a plastic mug. Drill two holes at its
base and fit rubber stoppers in these holes.
Insert carbon electrodes in these rubber
stoppers as shown in Fig. .
nConnect these electrodes to a volt
battery.
nFill the mug with water such that the
electrodes are immersed. Add a few drops
of dilute sulphuric acid to the water.
nTake two test tubes filled with water and
invert them over the two carbon electrodes.
nSwitch on the current and leave the
apparatus undisturbed for some time.
nYou will observe the formation of bubbles
at both the electrodes. These bubbles displace water in the
test tubes.
nIs the volume of the gas collected the same in both the test tubes?
nOnce the test tubes are filled with the respective gases, remove
them carefully.
nTest these gases one by one by bringing a burning candle close
to the mouth of the test tubes.
CAUTION: This step must be performed carefully by the teacher.
nWhat happens in each case?
nWhich gas is present in each test tube?Electrolysis of water2Pb(NO3)(s) Heat →  2PbO(s) + 4NO2(g) + O2(g) (.)
(Lead nitrate) (Lead oxide) (Nitrogen (Oxygen)
dioxide)
Let us perform some more decomposition reactions as given in
Activities . and .
(a) Iron nails dipped in copper sulphate solution?. A solution of a substance ‘X’ is used for whitewashing.
(i)Name the substance ‘X’ and write its formula.
(ii)Write the reaction of the substance ‘X’ named in (i) above with
water.
. Why is the amount of gas collected in one of the test tubes in . double of the amount collected in the other? Name this gas.
. Displacement Reaction
nTake three iron nails and clean them by
rubbing with sand paper.
nTake two test tubes marked as (A) and
(B). In each test tube, take about mL
copper sulphate solution.
nTie two iron nails with a thread and
immerse them carefully in the copper
sulphate solution in test tube B for
about minutes [Fig. . (a)]. Keep one
iron nail aside for comparison.
nAfter minutes, take out the iron nails
from the copper sulphate solution.
nCompare the intensity of the blue colour
of copper sulphate solutions in test tubes
(A) and (B) [Fig. . (b)].
nAlso, compare the colour of the iron nails
dipped in the copper sulphate solution
with the one kept aside [Fig. . (b)].Take about g barium hydroxide in a test tube. Add g of ammonium chloride and mix
with the help of a glass rod. Touch the bottom of the test tube with your palm. What do you
feel? Is this an exothermic or endothermic reaction?Carry out the following Silver bromide also behaves in the same way.
2AgBr(s)Sunlight → 2Ag(s) + Br2(g) (.)
The above reactions are used in black and white photography.
What form of energy is causing these decomposition reactions?
We have seen that the decomposition reactions require energy either
in the form of heat, light or electricity for breaking down the reactants.
Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic
reactions.
Chemical Reactions and Equations 11Why does the iron nail become brownish in colour and the blue colour
of copper sulphate solution fades?
The following chemical reaction takes place in this Activit y–
Fe(s) + CuSO4(aq) → FeSO4(aq) + Cu(s) (.)
(Copper sulphate) (Iron sulphate)
In this reaction, iron has displaced or removed another element,
copper , from copper sulphate solution. This r eaction is known as
displacement reaction.
Other examples of displacement reactions are
Zn(s) + CuSO4(aq) → ZnSO4(aq) + Cu(s) (.)
(Copper sulphate) (Zinc sulphate)
Pb(s) + CuCl2(aq) → PbCl2(aq) + Cu(s) (.)
(Copper chloride) (Lead chloride)
Zinc and lead ar e mor e reactive elements than copper . They displace
copper from its compounds.
. Double Displacement Reaction
Take about mL of sodium sulphate
solution in a test tube.
In another test tube, take about mL of
barium chloride solution.
Mix the two solutions (Fig. .).
What do you observe?
Formation of barium
sulphate and sodium
chlorideYou will observe that a white substance, which is
insoluble in water , is for med. This insoluble substance
formed is known as a precipitate. Any reaction that
produces a precipitate can be called a precipitation reaction.
Na2SO4(aq) + BaCl2(aq) → BaSO4(s) + 2NaCl(aq) (.)
(Sodium (Barium (Barium (Sodium
sulphate) chloride) sulphate) chloride)
Heat a china dish containing about g
copper powder (Fig. .).
What do you observe?
Oxidation of copper to
copper oxideThe surface of copper powder becomes coated with
black copper(II) oxide. Why has this black
substance formed?
This is because oxygen is added to copper and
copper oxide is formed.
2Cu + O2 Heat →  2CuO (.)
If hydrogen gas is passed over this heated material (CuO), the black
coating on the surface turns brown as the reverse reaction takes place
and copper is obtained.
CuO +H Cu+H O2 2Hea
t →   (.)
If a substance gains oxygen during a reaction, it is said to be oxidised.
If a substance loses oxygen during a reaction, it is said to be reduced.
During this reaction (.), the copper(II) oxide is losing oxygen and
is being reduced. The hydrogen is gaining oxygen and is being oxidised.
In other words, one reactant gets oxidised while the other gets reduced
during a reaction. Such reactions are called oxidation-reduction reactions
or redox reactions.
(.)
Some other examples of redox reactions are:
ZnO + C → +Zn CO (.)
MnO HCl MnCl H O Cl2 + → + + (.)Recall and potassium iodide.
(i)What was the colour of the precipitate formed? Can you name the compound
precipitated?
(ii)Write the balanced chemical equation for this r eaction.
(iii)Is this also a double displacement reaction?What causes this? The white precipitate of BaSO4 is formed by the
reaction of –
4SO and Ba2+. The other product formed is sodium chloride
which remains in the solution. Such reactions in which there is an
exchange of ions between the reactants are called double displacement
reactions.
Chemical Reactions and Equations 13In reaction (.) carbon is oxidised to CO and ZnO is reduced to Zn.
In reaction (.) HCl is oxidised to Cl2 whereas MnO2 is reduced to MnCl2.
From the above examples we can say that if a substance gains oxygen
or loses hydrogen during a reaction, it is oxidised. If a substance loses
oxygen or gains hydrogen during a reaction, it is reduced.
?. Why does the colour of copper sulphate solution change when
an iron nail is dipped in it?
. Give an example of a double displacement reaction other than
the one given in . Identify the substances that are oxidised and the substances
that are reduced in the following reactions.
(i)4Na(s) + O2(g) → 2Na2O(s)
(ii)CuO(s) + H2(g) → Cu(s) + H2O(l).
.HA HAHA HAHAVE YOU OBSERVED THE EFFECTS OF OVE YOU OBSERVED THE EFFECTS OF OVE YOU OBSERVED THE EFFECTS OF OVE YOU OBSERVED THE EFFECTS OF OVE YOU OBSERVED THE EFFECTS OF O XID XIDXID XIDXIDA AAAATION TIONTION TIONTION
REA REAREA REAREACTIONS IN EVERYDCTIONS IN EVERYDCTIONS IN EVERYDCTIONS IN EVERYDCTIONS IN EVERYD A AA AAY LIFE? Y LIFE?Y LIFE? Y LIFE?Y LIFE?
. Corrosion
You must have observed that iron articles are shiny when new, but get
coated with a reddish brown powder when left for some time. This process
is commonly known as rusting of iron. Some other metals also get
tarnished in this manner . Have you noticed the colour of the coating
formed on copper and silver? When a metal is attacked by substances
around it such as moisture, acids, etc., it is said to corrode and this
process is called corrosion. The black coating on silver and the green
coating on copper are other examples of corrosion.
Corrosion causes damage to car bodies, bridges, iron railings, ships
and to all objects made of metals, specially those of iron. Corrosion of
iron is a serious problem. Every year an enormous amount of money is
spent to r eplace damaged ir on. You will lear n mor e about corr osion in
Chapter .
. Rancidity
Have you ever tasted or smelt the fat/oil containing food materials left
for a long time?
When fats and oils are oxidised, they become rancid and their smell
and taste change. Usually substances which prevent oxidation
(antioxidants) are added to foods containing fats and oil. Keeping food
in air tight containers helps to slow down oxidation. Do you know that
chips manufacturers usually flush bags of chips with gas such as
nitrogen to prevent the chips from getting oxidised ?Recall and changes into a white substance, magnesium oxide. Is magnesium being oxidised or
reduced in this reaction?
A complete chemical equation represents the reactants, products and their physical
states symbolically.
A chemical equation is balanced so that the numbers of atoms of each type involved
in a chemical reaction are the same on the reactant and product sides of the
equation. Equations must always be balanced.
In a combination reaction two or more substances combine to form a new single
substance.
Decomposition reactions are opposite to combination reactions. In a decomposition
reaction, a single substance decomposes to give two or more substances.
Reactions in which heat is given out along with the products are called exothermic
reactions.
Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic reactions.
When an element displaces another element from its compound, a displacement
reaction occurs.
Two different atoms or groups of atoms (ions) are exchanged in double displacement
reactions.
Precipitation reactions produce insoluble salts.
Reactions also involve the gain or loss of oxygen or hydrogen by substances.
Oxidation is the gain of oxygen or loss of hydrogen. Reduction is the loss of oxygen
or gain of hydrogen.
EXERCISES
.Which of the statements about the reaction below are incorrect?
2PbO(s) + C(s) → 2Pb(s) + CO2(g)
(a) Lead is getting reduced.
(b) Carbon dioxide is getting oxidised.
(c) Carbon is getting oxidised.
(d) Lead oxide is getting reduced.
(i)(a) and (b)
(ii) (a) and (c)
(iii) (a), (b) and (c)
(iv) all
.Fe2O3 + 2Al → Al2O3 + 2Fe
The above reaction is an example of a
(a) combination reaction.
(b) double displacement reaction.
Chemical Reactions and Equations (c) decomposition reaction.
(d) displacement reaction.
.What happens when dilute hydr ochloric acid is added to ir on fillings? T ick the
correct answer .
(a) Hydrogen gas and iron chloride are produced.
(b) Chlorine gas and iron hydroxide are produced.
(c) No reaction takes place.
(d) Iron salt and water are produced.
.What is a balanced chemical equation? Why should chemical equations be
balanced?
.Translate the following statements into chemical equations and then balance them.
(a) Hydrogen gas combines with nitrogen to form ammonia.
(b) Hydrogen sulphide gas burns in air to give water and sulpur dioxide.
(c) Barium chloride reacts with aluminium sulphate to give aluminium chloride
and a precipitate of barium sulphate.
(d) Potassium metal reacts with water to give potassium hydroxide and hydrogen
gas.
.Balance the following chemical equations.
(a) HNO3 + Ca(OH) → Ca(NO3) + H2O
(b) NaOH + H2SO4 → Na2SO4 + H2O
(c) NaCl + AgNO3 → AgCl + NaNO3
(d) BaCl2 + H2SO4 → BaSO4 + HCl
.Write the balanced chemical equations for the following r eactions.
(a) Calcium hydr oxide + Carbon dioxide
→ Calcium carbonate + W ater
(b) Zinc + Silver nitrate → Zinc nitrate + Silver
(c) Aluminium + Copper chloride → Aluminium chloride + Copper
(d) Barium chloride + Potassium sulphate → Barium sulphate + Potassium chloride
.Write the balanced chemical equation for the following and identify the type of
reaction in each case.
(a) Potassium bromide(aq) + Barium iodide(aq) → Potassium iodide(aq) +
Barium bromide(s)
(b) Zinc carbonate(s) → Zinc oxide(s) + Carbon dioxide(g)
(c) Hydrogen(g) + Chlorine(g) → Hydrogen chloride(g)
(d) Magnesium(s) + Hydrochloric acid(aq) → Magnesium chloride(aq) + Hydrogen(g)
.What does one mean by exothermic and endothermic reactions? Give examples.
.Why is respiration considered an exothermic reaction? Explain.
.Why are decomposition reactions called the opposite of combination reactions?
Write equations for these r eactions.
Perform the following activity.
Take four beakers and label them as A, B, C and D.
Put mL of water in A, B and C beakers and copper sulphate solution in beaker D.
Measure and record the temperature of each liquid contained in the beakers above.
Add two spatulas of potassium sulphate, ammonium nitrate, anhydrous copper
sulphate and fine ir on fillings to beakers A, B, C and D r espectively and stir .
Finally measure and record the temperature of each of the mixture above.
Find out which reactions are exothermic and which ones are endothermic in nature.Write one equation each for decomposition r eactions wher e ener gy is supplied in
the form of heat, light or electricity.
.What is the difference between displacement and double displacement reactions?
Write equations for these r eactions.
. In the r
efining of silver , the recovery of silver from silver nitrate solution involved
displacement by copper metal. W rite down the r eaction involved.
.What do you mean by a precipitation reaction? Explain by giving examples.
.Explain the following in terms of gain or loss of oxygen with two examples each.
(a)Oxidation
(b)Reduction
.A shiny br own colour ed element ‘X’ on heating in air becomes black in colour .
Name the element ‘X’ and the black coloured compound formed.
.Why do we apply paint on iron articles?
.Oil and fat containing food items are flushed with nitrogen. Why?
.Explain the following terms with one example each.
(a)Corrosion
(b)Rancidity Acids, Bases
and Salts2 CHAPTER
You have lear nt in your pr evious classes that the sour and bitter
tastes of food are due to acids and bases, respectively, present in them.
If someone in the family is suffering from a problem of acidity after
overeating, which of the following would you suggest as a remedy– lemon
juice, vinegar or baking soda solution?
Which property did you think of while choosing the remedy?
Surely you must have used your knowledge about the ability of
acids and bases to nullify each other’s effect.
Recall how we tested sour and bitter substances without tasting
them.
You alr eady know that acids ar e sour in taste and change the colour
of blue litmus to red, whereas, bases are bitter and change the colour of
the red litmus to blue. Litmus is a natural indicator , turmeric is another
such indicator . Have you noticed that a stain of curry on a white cloth
becomes reddish-brown when soap, which is basic in nature, is scrubbed
on it? It turns yellow again when the cloth is washed with plenty of
water . You can also use synthetic indicators such as methyl orange and
phenolphthalein to test for acids and bases.
In this Chapter , we will study the r eactions of acids and bases, how
acids and bases cancel out each other’s effects and many more interesting
things that we use and see in our day-to-day life.
Do Y ou Know?Litmus solution is a purple dye, which is extracted from lichen, a plant belonging to
the division Thallophyta, and is commonly used as an indicator . When the litmus
solution is neither acidic nor basic, its colour is purple. There are many other natural
materials like red cabbage leaves, turmeric, coloured petals of some flowers such as
Hydrangea , Petunia and Geranium , which indicate the presence of acid or base in a
solution. These are called acid-base indicators or sometimes simply indicators.
UNDERSTUNDERST UNDERSTUNDERST ANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMICANDING THE CHEMIC AL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OFAL PROPERTIES OF
ACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASESACIDS AND BASES
. Acids and Bases in the Laborator y
These indicators tell us whether a substance is acidic or basic by
change in colour . Ther e are some substances whose odour changes in
acidic or basic media. These are called olfactory indicators. Let us try
out some of these indicators.QUESTION
?. You have been pr ovided with thr ee test tubes. One of them contains
distilled water and the other two contain an acidic solution and a basic
solution, r espectively. If you ar e given only r ed litmus paper , how will
you identify the contents of each test tube?
Collect the following solutions from the science laboratory–
hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulphuric acid (H2SO4), nitric acid (HNO3),
acetic acid (CH3COOH), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), calcium
hydroxide [Ca(OH)], potassium hydroxide (KOH), magnesium
hydroxide [Mg(OH)], and ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH).
Put a drop of each of the above solutions on a watch-glass one by
one and test with a drop of the indicators shown in Table .
What change in colour did you observe with red litmus, blue litmus,
phenolphthalein and methyl orange solutions for each of the
solutions taken?
Tabulate your observations in Table .
Table .
Sample Red Blue Phenolph- Methyl
solution litmus litmus -thalein orange
solution solution solution solution
Take some finely chopped onions in a plastic bag along with some
strips of clean cloth. T ie up the bag tightly and leave over night in
the fridge. The cloth strips can now be used to test for acids and
bases.
Take two of these cloth strips and check their odour .
Keep them on a clean surface and put a few drops of dilute HCl
solution on one strip and a few drops of dilute NaOH solution on
the other .
Acids, Bases and Salts 19Which of these – vanilla, onion and clove, can be used as olfactory
indicators on the basis of your observations?
Let us do some more activities to understand the chemical properties
of acids and bases.
. How do Acids and Bases React with Metals?Rinse both cloth strips with water and again check their odour .
Note your observations.
Now take some dilute vanilla essence and clove oil and check their
odour .
Take some dilute HCl solution in one test tube and dilute NaOH
solution in another . Add a few dr ops of dilute vanilla essence to
both test tubes and shake well. Check the odour once again and
record changes in odour , if any.
Similarly, test the change in the odour of clove oil with dilute HCl
and dilute NaOH solutions and record your observations.
CAUTION : This activity needs the teacher’s assistance.
Set the apparatus as shown in Fig. .
Take about mL of dilute sulphuric acid in a test tube and add a
few pieces of zinc granules to it.
What do you observe on the surface of zinc granules?
Pass the gas being evolved through the soap solution.
Why are bubbles formed in the soap solution?
Take a burning candle near a gas filled bubble.
What do you observe?
Repeat this CH3COOH.
Are the observations in all the cases the same or different?
gas by burning
from the acids as hydrogen gas and forms a compound called a salt.
Thus, the reaction of a metal with an acid can be summarised as –
Acid + Metal → Salt + Hydrogen gas
Can you now write the equations for the reactions you have observed?
The reactions occurring in the above Test tube A: Na CO HCl(aq) Cl(aq) H O(l) + CO2 (s) N a (g) + → +
Test tube B: NaHCO HCl(aq) Cl(aq) H O(l) + CO3 (s) Na (g) + → +
On passing the carbon dioxide gas evolved through lime water ,
Ca(OH) CO H O(l) (aq) (g) CaCO s3 + → +( )
(Lime water) (White precipitate)Place a few pieces of granulated zinc metal in a test tube.
Add mL of sodium hydroxide solution and warm the contents
of the test tube.
Repeat the rest of the steps as in observations.
The reaction that takes place can be written as follows.
2NaOH(aq) + Zn(s) → Na2ZnO2(s) + H2(g)
(Sodium zincate)
You find again that hydr ogen is for med in the reaction. However ,
such reactions are not possible with all metals.
. How do Metal Carbonates and Metal
Hydrogencarbonates React with Acids?
Take two test tubes, label them as A
and B.
Take about . g of sodium carbonate
(Na2CO3) in test tube A and about
. g of sodium hydrogencarbonate
(NaHCO3) in test tube B.
Add about mL of dilute HCl to both
the test tubes.
What do you observe?
Pass the gas produced in each case
through lime water (calcium
hydroxide solution) as shown in
Fig. . and record your observations.Passing carbon dioxide gas
through calcium hydroxide
solution
Acids, Bases and Salts 21Take about mL of dilute NaOH solution in a test tube and add
two drops of phenolphthalein solution.
What is the colour of the solution?
Add dilute HCl solution to the above solution drop by drop.
Is there any colour change for the reaction mixture?
Why did the colour of phenolphthalein change after the addition
of an acid?
Now add a few drops of NaOH to the above mixture.
Does the pink colour of phenolphthalein reappear?
Why do you think this has happened?On passing excess carbon dioxide the following reaction takes place:
CaCO s Ca(HCO aq3 ( ) ) ( ) + → H O(l)+ CO (g)
(Soluble in water)
Limestone, chalk and marble are different forms of calcium carbonate.
All metal carbonates and hydrogencarbonates react with acids to give a
corresponding salt, carbon dioxide and water .
Thus, the reaction can be summarised as –
In the above nullified by an acid and vice-versa. The reaction taking place is written as –
NaOH(aq) + HCl(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H2O(l)
The reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water is
known as a neutralisation reaction. In general, a neutralisation reaction
can be written as –
Base + Acid → Salt + W ater
. Reaction of Metallic Oxides with Acids
Take a small amount of copper oxide in a beaker and add dilute
hydrochloric acid slowly while stirring.
Note the colour of the solution. What has happened to the copper
oxide?
You will notice that the colour of the solution becomes blue-gr een
and the copper oxide dissolves. The blue-green colour of the solution is
due to the formation of copper(II) chloride in the reaction. The general
reaction between a metal oxide and an acid can be written as –
Metal oxide + Acid → Salt + W aterMetal carbonate/Metal hydrogencarbonate + Acid → Salt + Carbon dioxide + W ater
. How do Acids and Bases React with each other?
metallic oxides react with acids to give salts and water , similar to the
reaction of a base with an acid, metallic oxides are said to be basic oxides.
. Reaction of a Non-metallic Oxide with Base
You saw the r eaction between carbon dioxide and calcium hydr oxide
(lime water) in with carbon dioxide to pr oduce a salt and water . Since this is similar to
the reaction between a base and an acid, we can conclude that non-
metallic oxides are acidic in nature.
?. Why should curd and sour substances not be kept in brass and copper
vessels?
. Which gas is usually liberated when an acid reacts with a metal?
Illustrate with an example. How will you test for the presence of
this gas?
. Metal compound A reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce
effervescence. The gas evolved extinguishes a bur ning candle. W rite a
balanced chemical equation for the reaction if one of the compounds
formed is calcium chloride.
. WHA2. WHA2. WHA2. WHA2. WHA T DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HA VE IN
VE INVE IN VE INVE IN
COMMON?COMMON?COMMON?COMMON?COMMON?
In Section . we have seen that all acids have similar chemical
properties. What leads to this similarity in pr operties? W e saw in . that all acids generate hydrogen gas on reacting with metals, so
hydrogen seems to be common to all acids. Let us perform an investigate whether all compounds containing hydrogen are acidic.
Take solutions of glucose, alcohol,
hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, etc.
Fix two nails on a cork, and place the cork in
a mL beaker .
Connect the nails to the two terminals of a
volt battery through a bulb and a switch, as
shown in Fig. .
Now pour some dilute HCl in the beaker and
switch on the current.
Repeat with dilute sulphuric acid.
What do you observe?
Repeat the experiment separately with
glucose and alcohol solutions. What do you
observe now?
Does the bulb glow in all cases?
Acid solution in water
conducts electricity
Acids, Bases and Salts 23The bulb will start glowing in the case of acids, as shown in Fig. .
But you will observe that glucose and alcohol solutions do not conduct
electricity. Glowing of the bulb indicates that there is a flow of electric
current through the solution. The electric current is carried through the
acidic solution by ions.
Acids contain H+ ion as cation and anion such as C l– in HCl, N
O3– in
HNO3, SO2–
in H2SO4, CH3COO– in CH3COOH. Since the cation present in
acids is H+, this suggests that acids produce hydrogen ions, H+(aq), in
solution, which are responsible for their acidic properties.
Repeat the same hydroxide, etc. What can you conclude from the results of this . What Happens to an Acid or a Base in a W ater Solution?
Do acids produce ions only in aqueous solution? Let us test this.
Take about 1g solid NaCl in a clean and
dry test tube and set up the apparatus as
shown in Fig. .
Add some concentrated sulphuric acid to
the test tube.
What do you observe? Is there a gas coming
out of the delivery tube?
Test the gas evolved successively with dry
and wet blue litmus paper .
In which case does the litmus paper change
colour?
On the basis of the above you infer about the acidic character of:
(i)dry HCl gas
(ii)HCl solution?This experiment suggests that hydrogen ions in HCl are produced
in the pr esence of water . The separation of H+ ion fr om HCl molecules
cannot occur in the absence of water .
HCl + H2O → H3O+ + Cl–
Hydrogen ions cannot exist alone, but they exist after combining
with water molecules. Thus hydrogen ions must always be shown as
H+(aq) or hydronium ion (H3O+).
H+ + H2O → H3O+
We have seen that acids give H3O+ or H+(aq) ion in water . Let us see
what happens when a base is dissolved in water .
NaOH(s)H O2 →   Na+ (aq) + OH– (aq)Note to teachers: If the climate is very humid, you will have to pass the gas produced
through a guard tube (drying tube) containing calcium chloride to dry the gas.
Mg(OH)(s)H O2 →   Mg2+(aq)+2OH–(aq)
Bases generate hydr oxide (OH–) ions in water . Bases which are soluble
in water are called alkalis.Do Y ou
Know?All bases do not dissolve in water . An alkali is a base that dissolves in water . They
are soapy to touch, bitter and corrosive. Never taste or touch them as they may
cause harm. Which of the bases in the Table . are alkalis?
Now as we have identified that all acids generate H+(aq) and all
bases generate OH–(aq), we can view the neutralisation reaction as
follows –
Acid + Base → Salt + W ater
H X + M OH → MX + HOH
H+(aq) + OH– (aq) → H2O(l)
Let us see what is involved when water is mixed with an acid or a base.
Take mL water in a beaker .
Add a few drops of concentrated H2SO4 to it and swirl the
beaker slowly.
Touch the base of the beaker .
Is there a change in temperature?
Is this an exothermic or endothermic process?
Repeat the above and record your observations.Warning sign displayed
on containers containing
concentrated acids and
basesThe process of dissolving an acid or a base in water is a highly
exothermic one. Care must be taken while mixing concentrated nitric
acid or sulphuric acid with water . The acid must always be added slowly
to water with constant stirring. If water is added to a concentrated acid,
the heat generated may cause the mixture to splash out and cause burns.
The glass container may also break due to excessive local heating. Look
out for the warning sign (shown in Fig. .) on the can of concentrated
sulphuric acid and on the bottle of sodium hydroxide pellets.
Mixing an acid or base with water results in decrease in the
concentration of ions (H3O+/OH–) per unit volume. Such a process is
called dilution and the acid or the base is said to be diluted.
Acids, Bases and Salts . HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?. HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?. HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?. HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?. HOW STRONG ARE ACID OR BASE SOLUTIONS?
We know how acid-base indicators can be used to distinguish between
an acid and a base. W e have also lear nt in the previous section about
dilution and decrease in concentration of H+ or OH– ions in solutions.
Can we quantitatively find the amount of these ions present in a solution?
Can we judge how strong a given acid or base is?
We can do this by making use of a universal indicator , which is a
mixture of several indicators. The universal indicator shows different
colours at different concentrations of hydrogen ions in a solution.
A scale for measuring hydrogen ion concentration in a solution, called
pH scale has been developed. The p in pH stands for ‘ potenz ’ in German,
meaning power . On the pH scale we can measur e pH generally fr om
(very acidic) to (very alkaline). pH should be thought of simply as a
number which indicates the acidic or basic nature of a solution. Higher
the hydronium ion concentration, lower is the pH value.
The pH of a neutral solution is . V alues less than on the pH scale
represent an acidic solution. As the pH value increases from to , it
represents an increase in OH– ion concentration in the solution, that is,
increase in the strength of alkali (Fig. .). Generally paper impregnated
with the universal indicator is used for measuring pH.?. Why do HCl, HNO3, etc., show acidic characters in aqueous solutions
while solutions of compounds like alcohol and glucose do not show acidic
character?
. Why does an aqueous solution of an acid conduct electricity?
. Why does dry HCl gas not change the colour of the dry litmus paper?
. While diluting an acid, why is it recommended that the acid should be
added to water and not water to the acid?
. How is the concentration of hydronium ions (H3O+) affected when a
solution of an acid is diluted?
. How is the concentration of hydroxide ions (O H–) affected when excess
base is dissolved in a solution of sodium hydroxide?
Test the pH values
of solutions given in
Table .
Record your observations.
What is the nature of each
substance on the basis of
your observations?
The strength of acids and bases depends on the number of H+ ions
and OH– ions produced, respectively. If we take hydrochloric acid and
acetic acid of the same concentration, say one molar , then these pr oduce
different amounts of hydrogen ions. Acids that give rise to more H+ ions
are said to be strong acids, and acids that give less H+ ions are said to be
weak acids. Can you now say what weak and strong bases are?
. Impor2. Impor2. Impor2. Impor2. Impor tance of pH in Evertance of pH in Evertance of pH in Evertance of pH in Evertance of pH in Ever yday Life yday Lifeyday Lifeyday Lifeyday Life
Are plants and animals pH sensitive?
Our body works within the pH range of . to . Living organisms can
survive only in a narrow range of pH change. When pH of rain water is
less than ., it is called acid rain. When acid rain flows into the rivers, it
lowers the pH of the river water . The survival of aquatic life in such rivers
becomes difficult.Table .
S. Solution Colour of Approx- Nature of
No. pH paper -imate substance
pH value
1Saliva (before meal)
2Saliva (after meal)
3Lemon juice
4Colourless aerated
drink
5Carrot juice
6Coffee
7Tomato juice
8Tap water
91M NaOH
101M HCl
Acids, Bases and Salts 27What is the pH of the soil in your backyard?
Plants require a specific pH range for their healthy growth. To find out
the pH required for the healthy growth of a plant, you can collect the soil
from various places and check the pH in the manner described below in
region from which you have collected the soil.Acids in other planets
The atmosphere of venus is made up of thick white and yellowish clouds of
sulphuric acid. Do you think life can exist on this planet?
Put about g soil in a test tube and add mL water to it.
Shake the contents of the test tube.
Filter the contents and collect the filtrate in a test tube.
Check the pH of this filtrate with the help of universal
indicator paper .
What can you conclude about the ideal soil pH for the growth of
plants in your region?
pH in our digestive system
It is very interesting to note that our stomach produces hydrochloric
acid. It helps in the digestion of food without harming the stomach.
During indigestion the stomach produces too much acid and this causes
pain and irritation. To get rid of this pain, people use bases called
antacids. One such remedy must have been suggested by you at the
beginning of this Chapter . These antacids neutralise the excess acid.
Magnesium hydroxide (Milk of magnesia), a mild base, is often used for
this purpose.
pH change as the cause of tooth decay
Tooth decay starts when the pH of the mouth is lower than . Tooth
enamel, made up of calcium hydroxyapatite (a crystalline form of calcium
phosphate) is the hardest substance in the body. It does not dissolve in
water , but is corr oded when the pH in the mouth is below . Bacteria
present in the mouth produce acids by degradation of sugar and food
particles remaining in the mouth after eating. The best way to prevent
this is to clean the mouth after eating food. Using toothpastes, which are
generally basic, for cleaning the teeth can neutralise the excess acid and
prevent tooth decay.
Self defence by animals and plants through chemical warfare
Have you ever been stung by a honey-bee? Bee-sting leaves an acid
which causes pain and irritation. Use of a mild base like baking soda
on the stung area gives relief. Stinging hair of nettle leaves inject
methanoic acid causing burning pain.Do Y ou
Know?
In the previous sections we have seen the formation of salts during
various reactions. Let us understand more about their preparation,
properties and uses.
. F amily of Salts
Write the chemical for mulae of the salts given below.
Potassium sulphate, sodium sulphate, calcium sulphate,
magnesium sulphate, copper sulphate, sodium chloride, sodium
nitrate, sodium carbonate and ammonium chloride.Nature provides neutralisation options
Nettle is a herbaceous plant which grows in the wild. Its leaves have stinging hair ,
which cause painful stings when touched accidentally. This is due to the methanoic
acid secreted by them. A traditional remedy is rubbing the
area with the leaf of the dock plant, which often grows beside
the nettle in the wild. Can you guess the nature of the dock
plant? So next time you know what to look out for if you
accidentally touch a nettle plant while trekking. Are you aware
of any other effective traditional remedies for such stings?
Table . Some naturally occurring acids
Natural source Acid Natural source Acid
Vinegar Acetic acid Sour milk (Curd) Lactic acid
Orange Citric acid Lemon Citric acid
Tamarind Tartaric acid Ant sting Methanoic acid
Tomato Oxalic acid Nettle sting Methanoic acid
. You have two solutions, A and B. The pH of solution A is and pH of
solution B is . Which solution has more hydrogen ion concentration?
Which of this is acidic and which one is basic?
. What effect does the concentration of H+(aq) ions have on the nature of the
solution?
. Do basic solutions also have H+(aq) ions? If yes, then why are these basic?
. Under what soil condition do you think a farmer would treat the soil of his
fields with quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) or
chalk (calcium carbonate)? ?Do Y ou Know?
Acids, Bases and Salts 29Identify the acids and bases from which the above salts may be
obtained.
Salts having the same positive or negative radicals are said to
belong to a family. For example, NaCl and Na2SO4 belong to the
family of sodium salts. Similarly, NaCl and KCl belong to the family
of chloride salts. How many families can you identify among the
salts given in this . pH of Salts
Collect the following salt samples – sodium chloride, potassium
nitrate, aluminium chloride, zinc sulphate, copper sulphate,
sodium acetate, sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate
(some other salts available can also be taken).
Check their solubility in water (use distilled water only).
Check the action of these solutions on litmus and find the pH
using a pH paper .
Which of the salts are acidic, basic or neutral?
Identify the acid or base used to form the salt.
Report your observations in Table .
Salts of a strong acid and a strong base
are neutral with pH value of . On the other
hand, salts of a strong acid and weak base
are acidic with pH value less than and those
of a strong base and weak acid are basic in
nature, with pH value more than .
. Chemicals from Common Salt
By now you have learnt that the salt formed
by the combination of hydrochloric acid and
sodium hydroxide solution is called sodium
chloride. This is the salt that you use in food.
You must have observed in the above that it is a neutral salt.
Seawater contains many salts dissolved
in it. Sodium chloride is separated from these
salts. Deposits of solid salt are also found in
several parts of the world. These large crystals
are often brown due to impurities. This is
called rock salt. Beds of rock salt were formed
when seas of bygone ages dried up. Rock salt
is mined like coal.
You must have hear d about Mahatma Gandhi’s Dandi March. Did
you know that sodium chloride was such an important symbol in our
struggle for freedom?Table .
Salt pH Acid used Base used
The common salt thus obtained is an important raw material for various
materials of daily use, such as sodium hydroxide, baking soda, washing
soda, bleaching powder and many more. Let us see how one substance
is used for making all these different substances.
Sodium hydroxide
When electricity is passed through an aqueous solution of sodium
chloride (called brine), it decomposes to form sodium hydroxide. The
process is called the chlor -alkali pr ocess because of the pr oducts for med–
chlor for chlorine and alkali for sodium hydroxide.
2NaCl(aq) + 2H2O(l) → 2NaOH(aq) + Cl2(g) + H2(g)
Chlorine gas is given off at the anode, and hydrogen gas at the cathode.
Sodium hydroxide solution is formed near the cathode. The three
products produced in this process are all useful. different uses of these products.
Bleaching powder
You have alr eady come to know that chlorine is pr oduced during the
electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride (brine). This chlorine gas is used
for the manufactur e of bleaching powder . Bleaching powder is pr oduced
by the action of chlorine on dry slaked lime [Ca(OH)]. Bleaching powder
is represented as CaOCl2, though the actual composition is quite
complex.
Ca(OH) + Cl2 → CaOCl2 + H2OImportant products from the chlor-alkali process
Acids, Bases and Salts 31Bleaching powder is used –
(i)for bleaching cotton and linen in the textile industry, for bleaching
wood pulp in paper factories and for bleaching washed clothes
in laundry;
(ii)as an oxidising agent in many chemical industries; and
(iii)to make drinking water free from germs.
Baking soda
The baking soda is commonly used in the kitchen for making tasty crispy
pakoras, etc. Sometimes it is added for faster cooking. The chemical
name of the compound is sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO3). It is
produced using sodium chloride as one of the raw materials.
NaCl + H O + CO + NH NH Cl + NaHCO2 →
(Ammonium (Sodium
chloride) hydrogencarbonate)
Did you check the pH of sodium hydrogencarbonate in Can you correlate why it can be used to neutralise an acid? It is a mild
non-corrosive basic salt. The following reaction takes place when it is
heated during cooking –
2NaHCO Na CO + H O+CO3 2Heat → 
(Sodium (Sodium
hydrogencarbonate) carbonate)
Sodium hydrogencarbonate has got various uses in the household.
Uses of Baking soda
(i)For making baking powder , which is a mixture of baking soda
(sodium hydrogencarbonate) and a mild edible acid such as
tartaric acid. When baking powder is heated or mixed in water ,
the following reaction takes place –
NaHCO3 + H+ → CO2 + H2O + Sodium salt of acid
(From any acid)
Carbon dioxide produced during the reaction can cause bread or
cake to rise making them soft and spongy.
(ii)Sodium hydrogencarbonate is also an ingredient in antacids.
Being alkaline, it neutralises excess acid in the stomach and
provides relief.
(iii)It is also used in soda-acid fire extinguishers.
Washing soda
Another chemical that can be obtained from sodium chloride is
Na2CO3H2O (washing soda). Y ou have seen above that sodium
carbonate can be obtained by heating baking soda; recrystallisation of
sodium carbonate gives washing soda. It is also a basic salt.
Na CO H O Na CO H O
Sodium
car
bonate2 + → .
(
)
What does 10H2O signify? Does it make Na2CO3 wet? W e will addr ess
this question in the next section.
Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate are useful
chemicals for many industrial processes as well.
Uses of washing soda
(i)Sodium carbonate (washing soda) is used in glass, soap and
paper industries.
(ii)It is used in the manufacture of sodium compounds such as borax.
(iii)Sodium carbonate can be used as a cleaning agent for domestic
purposes.
(iv)It is used for r emoving per manent har dness of water .
. Are the Cr ystals of Salts really Dr y?
Heat a few crystals of copper sulphate
in a dry boiling tube.
What is the colour of the copper
sulphate after heating?
Do you notice water droplets in the
boiling tube? Where have these come
from?
Add - drops of water on the sample
of copper sulphate obtained after
heating.
What do you observe? Is the blue
colour of copper sulphate restored?
Removing water
of crystallisationCopper sulphate crystals which seem to be dry contain water of
crystallisation. When we heat the crystals, this water is removed and the
salt turns white.
If you moisten the crystals again with water , you will find that blue
colour of the crystals reappears.
Water of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules pr esent
in one formula unit of a salt. Five water molecules are present in one
formula unit of copper sulphate. Chemical formula for hydrated copper
sulphate is Cu SO4. 5H2O. Now you would be able to answer the question
whether the molecule of Na2CO3H2O is wet.
One other salt, which possesses water of crystallisation is gypsum.
It has two water molecules as water of cyrstallisation. It has the chemical
formula CaSO4H2O. Let us look into the use of this salt.
Plaster of Paris
On heating gypsum at K, it loses water molecules and becomes
calcium sulphate hemihydrate ( 21CaSO . H O2). This is called Plaster of
Acids, Bases and Salts 33Paris, the substance which doctors use as plaster for supporting
fractured bones in the right position. Plaster of Paris is a white powder
and on mixing with water , it changes to gypsum once again giving a
hard solid mass.
CaSO .
2H O +
2H O CaSOH O4
(Plaster of Paris ) Gyps um)→
(
Note that only half a water molecule is shown to be attached as water
of crystallisation. How can you get half a water molecule? It is written in
this form because two formula units of CaSO4 share one molecule of
water . Plaster of Paris is used for making toys, materials for decoration
and for making sur faces smooth. T ry to find out why is calcium sulphate
hemihydrate called ‘Plaster of Paris’ ?
. What is the common name of the compound CaOCl2?
. Name the substance which on treatment with chlorine yields bleaching
powder .
. Name the sodium compound which is used for softening har d water .
. What will happen if a solution of sodium hydrocarbonate is heated?
Give the equation of the reaction involved.
. Write an equation to show the r eaction between Plaster of Paris and
water .?
What y ou hav e learnt
Acid-base indicators are dyes or mixtures of dyes which are used to indicate the
presence of acids and bases.
Acidic nature of a substance is due to the formation of H+(aq) ions in solution.
Formation of OH–(aq) ions in solution is responsible for the basic nature of a
substance.
When an acid reacts with a metal, hydrogen gas is evolved and a corresponding
salt is formed.
When a base reacts with a metal, along with the evolution of hydrogen gas a salt is
formed which has a negative ion composed of the metal and oxygen.
When an acid reacts with a metal carbonate or metal hydrogencarbonate, it gives
the corr esponding salt, carbon dioxide gas and water.
Acidic and basic solutions in water conduct electricity because they produce
hydrogen and hydroxide ions respectively.
scale (-) which gives the measure of hydrogen ion concentration in a solution.
A neutral solution has a pH of exactly , while an acidic solution has a pH less
than and a basic solution a pH more than .
Living beings carry out their metabolic activities within an optimal pH range.
Mixing concentrated acids or bases with water is a highly exothermic process.
Acids and bases neutralise each other to for m corr esponding salts and water .
Water of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules pr esent in one for mula
unit of a salt.
Salts have various uses in everyday life and in industries.
EXERCISES
. A solution turns red litmus blue, its pH is likely to be
(a) (b) (c) (d)
.A solution reacts with crushed egg-shells to give a gas that turns lime-water milky.
The solution contains
(a)NaCl (b)HCl (c)LiCl (d)KCl
. mL of a solution of NaOH is found to be completely neutralised by mL of a
given solution of HCl. If we take mL of the same solution of NaOH, the amount
HCl solution (the same solution as before) required to neutralise it will be
(a) mL (b) mL (c) mL (d) mL
.Which one of the following types of medicines is used for treating indigestion?
(a)Antibiotic
(b)Analgesic
(c)Antacid
(d)Antiseptic
.Write wor d equations and then balanced equations for the reaction taking
place when –
(a)dilute sulphuric acid reacts with zinc granules.
(b)dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with magnesium ribbon.
(c)dilute sulphuric acid reacts with aluminium powder .
(d)dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with iron filings.
.Compounds such as alcohols and glucose also contain hydrogen but are not
categorised as acids. Describe an .Why does distilled water not conduct electricity, whereas rain water does?
Acids, Bases and Salts .Why do acids not show acidic behaviour in the absence of water?
.Five solutions A,B,C,D and E when tested with universal indicator showed pH as
,,, and , respectively. Which solution is
(a)neutral?
(b)strongly alkaline?
(c)strongly acidic?
(d)weakly acidic?
(e)weakly alkaline?
Arrange the pH in increasing order of hydrogen-ion concentration.
.Equal lengths of magnesium ribbons are taken in test tubes A and B. Hydrochloric
acid (HCl) is added to test tube A, while acetic acid (CH3COOH) is added to test
tube B. Amount and concentration taken for both the acids are same. In which test
tube will the fizzing occur more vigorously and why?
.Fresh milk has a pH of . How do you think the pH will change as it turns into
curd? Explain your answer .
.A milkman adds a very small amount of baking soda to fresh milk.
(a)Why does he shift the pH of the fresh milk from to slightly alkaline?
(b)Why does this milk take a long time to set as curd?
.Plaster of Paris should be stored in a moistur e-proof container . Explain why?
.What is a neutralisation reaction? Give two examples.
.Give two important uses of washing soda and baking soda.
(I) Prepare your own indicator
Crush beetr oot in a mortar .
Add sufficient water to obtain the extract.
Filter the extract by the procedure learnt by you in earlier classes.
Collect the filtrate to test the substances you may have tasted earlier .
Arrange four test tubes in a test tube stand and label them as A,B,C and D. Pour
mL each of lemon juice solution, soda-water , vinegar and baking soda solution
in them respectively.
Put - drops of the beetroot extract in each test tube and note the colour change
if any. W rite your observation in a Table.
You can pr epare indicators by using other natural materials like extracts of r ed
cabbage leaves, coloured petals of some flowers such as Petunia , Hydrangea and
Geranium .Group A ctivity
The reaction of acids with metal hydrogencarbonates is used in the fire extinguishers
which produce carbon dioxide.
Take mL of sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO3) solution in a wash-bottle.
Suspend an ignition tube containing dilute sulphuric acid in the wash-bottle
(Fig. .) .
Close the mouth of the wash-bottle.
Tilt the wash-bottle so that the acid from the ignition tube mixes with the sodium
hydrogencarbonate solution below.
You will notice dischar ge coming out of the nozzle.
Direct this discharge on a burning candle. What happens?
sodium hydrogencarbonate, (b) Discharge coming out of the nozzle Metals and Non-metals3 CHAPTER
In Class IX you have lear nt about various elements. Y ou have seen
that elements can be classified as metals or non-metals on the basis of
their properties.
Think of some uses of metals and non-metals in your daily life.
What properties did you think of while categorising elements
as metals or non-metals?
How are these properties related to the uses of these elements?
Let us look at some of these properties in detail.
. PHYSIC3. PHYSIC3. PHYSIC3. PHYSIC3. PHYSIC AL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIESAL PROPERTIES
. Metals
The easiest way to start grouping substances is by comparing their
physical properties. Let us study this with the help of the following
activities. For performing A ctivities . to ., collect the samples of
following metals – iron, copper , aluminium, magnesium, sodium, lead,
zinc and any other metal that is easily available.
Take samples of ir on, copper , aluminium and magnesium. Note
the appearance of each sample.
Clean the surface of each sample by rubbing them with sand paper
and note their appearance again.
Metals, in their pure state, have a shining surface. This property is
called metallic lustre.
Take small pieces of ir on, copper , aluminium, and magnesium.
Try to cut these metals with a sharp knife and note your
observations.
Hold a piece of sodium metal with a pair of tongs.
CAUTION: Always handle sodium metal with care. Dry it by
pressing between the folds of a filter paper .
Put it on a watch-glass and try to cut it with a knife.
What do you observe?
property is called malleability. Did you know that gold and silver are the
most malleable metals?Take pieces of ir on, zinc, lead and copper .
Place any one metal on a block of iron and strike it four or five
times with a hammer . What do you observe?
Repeat with other metals.
Record the change in the shape of these metals.You will find that metals ar e generally har d. The har
dness varies
from metal to metal.
List the metals whose wires you have seen in daily life.
The ability of metals to be drawn into thin wires is called ductility.
Gold is the most ductile metal. Y ou will be surprised to know that a wir e
of about km length can be drawn from one gram of gold.
It is because of their malleability and ductility that metals can be
given different shapes according to our needs.
Can you name some metals that are used for making cooking vessels?
Do you know why these metals are used for making vessels? Let us do
the following Take an aluminium or copper
wire. Clamp this wire on a
stand, as shown in Fig. .
Fix a pin to the free end of the
wire using wax.
Heat the wire with a spirit lamp,
candle or a burner near the
place where it is clamped.
What do you observe after some
time?
Note your observations. Does
the metal wire melt?
The above activity shows that metals are good conductors of heat
and have high melting points. The best conductors of heat are silver and
copper . Lead and mer cury are comparatively poor conductors of heat.
Do metals also conduct electricity? Let us find out.Metals are good
conductors of heat.
Metals and Non-metals 39You must have seen that the wir es that carry curr ent
in your homes have a coating of polyvinylchloride (PVC)
or a rubber -like material. Why ar e electric wir es coated
with such substances?
What happens when metals strike a hard surface? Do they produce
a sound? The metals that produce a sound on striking a hard surface
are said to be sonorous. Can you now say why school bells are made of
metals?
. Non-metals
In the previous Class you have learnt that there are very few non-metals
as compared to metals. Some of the examples of non-metals are carbon,
sulphur , iodine, oxygen, hydr ogen, etc. The non-metals ar e either solids
or gases except bromine which is a liquid.
Do non-metals also have physical properties similar to that of metals?
Let us find out.Set up an electric circuit as shown in Fig. .
Place the metal to be tested in the circuit
between terminals A and B as shown.
Does the bulb glow? What does this indicate?
Metals are good
conductors of electricity.
Collect samples of carbon (coal or graphite), sulphur and iodine.
Carry out the Activities . to . and . with these non-metals
and record your observations.
Compile your observations regarding metals and non-metals in Table .
Table .
Element Symbol Type of Hardness Malleability Ductility Conducts Sonority
surface Electricity
On the bases of the observations recorded in Table ., discuss the
general physical properties of metals and non-metals in the class. Y ou
must have concluded that we cannot group elements according to their
physical properties alone, as there are many exceptions. For example –
(i)All metals except mercury exist as solids at room temperature.
In
These two metals will melt if you keep them on your palm.
(ii)Iodine is a non-metal but it is lustrous.
(iii)Carbon is a non-metal that can exist in different forms. Each
form is called an allotrope. Diamond, an allotrope of carbon, is
the hardest natural substance known and has a very high melting
and boiling point. Graphite, another allotrope of carbon, is a
conductor of electricity.
(iv)Alkali metals (lithium, sodium, potassium) are so soft that they
can be cut with a knife. They have low densities and low melting
points.
Elements can be more clearly classified as metals and non-metals
on the basis of their chemical properties.
Take a magnesium ribbon and some sulphur powder .
Burn the magnesium ribbon. Collect the ashes formed and dissolve
them in water .
Test the r esultant solution with both r ed and blue litmus paper .
Is the product formed on burning magnesium acidic or basic?
Now bur n sulphur powder . Place a test tube over the bur ning
sulphur to collect the fumes produced.
Add some water to the above test tube and shake.
Test this solution with blue and r ed litmus paper .
Is the product formed on burning sulphur acidic or basic?
Can you write equations for these reactions?
?. Give an example of a metal which
(i)is a liquid at room temperature.
(ii)can be easily cut with a knife.
(iii)is the best conductor of heat.
(iv)is a poor conductor of heat.
.Explain the meanings of malleable and ductile.
. CHEMIC3. CHEMIC3. CHEMIC3. CHEMIC3. CHEMIC AL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF METAL PROPERTIES OF MET ALS ALSALSALSALS
We will lear n about the chemical pr operties of metals in the following
Sections . to . For this, collect the samples of following metals –
aluminium, copper , iron, lead, magnesium, zinc and sodium. Most non-metals pr oduce acidic oxides when dissolve in water . On
the other hand, most metals, give rise to basic oxides. Y ou will be lear ning
more about these metal oxides in the next section.
Metals and Non-metals . What happens when Metals are bur nt in Air?
You have seen in white flame. Do all metals react in the same manner? Let us check by
performing the following CAUTION : The following activity needs the teacher’s assistance.
It would be better if students wear eye protection.
Hold any of the samples taken above with a pair of tongs and try
burning over a flame. Repeat with the other metal samples.
Collect the product if formed.
Let the products and the metal surface cool down.
Which metals burn easily?
What flame colour did you observe when the metal burnt?
How does the metal surface appear after burning?
Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of their reactivity
towards oxygen.
Are the products soluble in water?
Almost all metals combine with oxygen to form metal oxides.
Metal + Oxygen → Metal oxide
For example, when copper is heated in air , it combines with oxygen
to form copper(II) oxide, a black oxide.
2Cu + O2 → 2CuO
(Copper) (Copper(II) oxide)
Similarly, aluminium forms aluminium oxide.
4Al +3O2 → 2Al2O3
(Aluminium) (Aluminium oxide)
Recall from Chapter , how copper oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid.
We have lear nt that metal oxides ar e basic in natur e. But some metal
oxides, such as aluminium oxide, zinc oxide show both acidic as well as
basic behaviour . Such metal oxides which r eact with both acids as well as
bases to produce salts and water are known as amphoteric oxides.
Aluminium oxide reacts in the following manner with acids and bases –
Al2O3 + 6HCl →2AlCl3+3H2O
Al2O3 + 2NaOH →2NaAlO2+H2O
(Sodium
aluminate)
Most metal oxides are insoluble in water but some of these dissolve
in water to form alkalis. Sodium oxide and potassium oxide dissolve in
water to produce alkalis as follows –
Na2O(s) +H2O(l) → 2NaOH(aq)
K2O(s) +H2O(l) → 2KOH(aq)
oxygen at the same rate. Different metals show different reactivities
towards oxygen. Metals such as potassium and sodium react so
vigorously that they catch fire if kept in the open. Hence, to protect them
and to prevent accidental fires, they are kept immersed in kerosene oil.
At ordinary temperature, the surfaces of metals such as magnesium,
aluminium, zinc, lead, etc., are covered with a thin layer of oxide. The
protective oxide layer prevents the metal from further oxidation. Iron
does not burn on heating but iron filings burn vigorously when sprinkled
in the flame of the bur ner. Copper does not bur n, but the hot metal is
coated with a black coloured layer of copper(II) oxide. Silver and gold do
not react with oxygen even at high temperatures.Do Y ou Know?Anodising is a process of forming a thick oxide layer of aluminium. Aluminium
develops a thin oxide layer when exposed to air . This aluminium oxide coat makes it
resistant to further corrosion. The resistance can be improved further by making the
oxide layer thicker . During anodising, a clean aluminium article is made the anode
and is electrolysed with dilute sulphuric acid. The oxygen gas evolved at the anode
reacts with aluminium to make a thicker pr otective oxide layer . This oxide layer can
be dyed easily to give aluminium articles an attractive finish.
After performing is the most reactive of the samples of metals taken here. The reaction of
magnesium is less vigorous implying that it is not as reactive as sodium.
But burning in oxygen does not help us to decide about the reactivity of
zinc, iron, copper or lead. Let us see some more reactions to arrive at a
conclusion about the order of reactivity of these metals.
. What happens when Metals react with W ater?
CAUTION: This Collect the samples of the same metals as in Put small pieces of the samples separately in beakers half-filled
with cold water .
Which metals reacted with cold water? Arrange them in the
increasing or der of their r eactivity with cold water .
Did any metal produce fire on water?
Does any metal start floating after some time?
Put the metals that did not react with cold water in beakers
half-filled with hot water .
For the metals that did not r eact with hot water , arrange the
apparatus as shown in Fig. . and observe their reaction with steam.
Which metals did not react even with steam?
Arrange the metals in the decr easing or der of r eactivity with water .
Metals and Non-metals 43Metals react with water and produce a metal oxide and hydrogen
gas. Metal oxides that are soluble in water dissolve in it to further form
metal hydr oxide. But all metals do not r eact with water .
Metal +Water →Metal oxide + Hydrogen
Metal oxide +Water →Metal hydroxide
Metals like potassium and sodium r eact violently with cold water . In
case of sodium and potassium, the reaction is so violent and exothermic
that the evolved hydrogen immediately catches fire.
2K(s) + 2H2O(l) → 2KOH(aq) + H2(g) + heat energy
2Na(s) + 2H2O(l) → 2NaOH(aq) + H2(g) + heat energy
The reaction of calcium with water is less violent. The heat evolved is
not sufficient for the hydrogen to catch fire.
Ca(s) + 2H2O(l) → Ca(OH)(aq) + H2(g)
Calcium starts floating because the bubbles of hydrogen gas formed
stick to the surface of the metal.
Magnesium does not r eact with cold water . It reacts with hot water
to form magnesium hydroxide and hydrogen. It also starts floating due
to the bubbles of hydrogen gas sticking to its surface.
Metals like aluminium, iron and zinc do not react either with cold or
hot water . But they r eact with steam to for m the metal oxide and hydr ogen.
2Al(s) +3H2O(g) → Al2O3(s) + 3H2(g)
3Fe(s) +4H2O(g) → Fe3O4(s) + 4H2(g)
Metals such as lead, copper , silver and gold do not r eact with water at all.
. What happens when Metals react with Acids?
You have alr
eady lear nt that metals r eact with acids to give a salt and
hydrogen gas.
But do all metals react in the same manner? Let us find out.
Collect all the metal samples except sodium and potassium again.
If the samples ar e tar nished, rub them clean with sand paper .
CAUTION: Do not take sodium and potassium as they react
vigorously even with cold water .
Put the samples separately in test tubes containing dilute
hydrochloric acid.
Suspend thermometers in the test tubes, so that their bulbs are
dipped in the acid.
Observe the rate of formation of bubbles carefully.
Which metals reacted vigorously with dilute hydrochloric acid?
With which metal did you record the highest temperature?
Arrange the metals in the decreasing order of reactivity with dilute
acids.
Write equations for the r eactions of magnesium, aluminium, zinc
and iron with dilute hydrochloric acid.
Hydrogen gas is not evolved when a metal reacts with nitric acid. It is
because HNO3 is a strong oxidising agent. It oxidises the H2 produced to
water and itself gets reduced to any of the nitrogen oxides (N2O, NO,
NO2). But magnesium (Mg) and manganese (Mn) react with very dilute
HNO3 to evolve H2 gas.
You must have observed in of bubbles was the fastest in the case of magnesium. The reaction was
also the most exothermic in this case. The reactivity decreases in the
order Mg > Al > Zn > Fe. In the case of copper , no bubbles wer e seen and
the temperature also remained unchanged. This shows that copper does
not react with dilute HCl.Do Y ou Know?Aqua regia, (Latin for ‘royal water’) is a freshly prepared mixture of concentrated
hydrochloric acid and concentrated nitric acid in the ratio of :. It can dissolve
gold, even though neither of these acids can do so alone. Aqua regia is a highly
corrosive, fuming liquid. It is one of the few reagents that is able to dissolve gold and
platinum.
. How do Metals react with Solutions of other Metal
Salts?
Take a clean wire of copper and an iron nail.
Put the copper wire in a solution of iron sulphate and the iron
nail in a solution of copper sulphate taken in test tubes (Fig. .).
Record your observations after minutes.
Metals and Non-metals 45In which test tube did you find that a reaction has occurred?
On what basis can you say that a reaction has actually taken
place?
Can you correlate your observations for the Activities ., .
and .?
Write a balanced chemical equation for the r eaction that has taken
place.
Name the type of reaction.
Reactive metals can displace less
reactive metals from their compounds in
solution or molten form.
We have seen in the pr evious sections
that all metals ar e not equally r eactive. W e
checked the reactivity of various metals
with oxygen, water and acids. But all
metals do not react with these reagents.
So we were not able to put all the metal
samples we had collected in decreasing
order of their reactivity. Displacement
reactions studied in Chapter give better
evidence about the reactivity of metals. It
is simple and easy if metal A displaces
metal B from its solution, it is more reactive than B.
Metal A + Salt solution of B → Salt solution of A + Metal B
Which metal, copper or iron, is more reactive according to your
observations in . The Reactivity Series
The reactivity series is a list of metals arranged in the order of their
decreasing activities. After performing displacement experiments
(Activities . and .), the following series, (Table .) known as the
reactivity or activity series has been developed.
Table . K Potassium Most reactive
Na Sodium
Ca Calcium
Mg Magnesium
Al Aluminium
Zn Zinc Reactivity decreases
Fe Iron
Pb Lead
[H] [Hydrogen]
Cu Copper
Hg Mercury
Ag Silver
Au Gold Least reactiveReaction of metals with
salt solutions
. Why is sodium kept immersed in kerosene oil?
. Write equations for the r eactions of
(i)iron with steam
(ii)calcium and potassium with water
. Samples of four metals A, B, C and D were taken and added to the
following solution one by one. The results obtained have been tabulated
as follows.
. 
In the above activities, you saw the reactions of metals with a number of
reagents. Why do metals react in this manner? Let us recall what we
learnt about the electronic configuration of elements in Class IX. W e
learnt that noble gases, which have a completely filled valence shell, show
little chemical activity. W e, ther efore, explain the r eactivity of elements
as a tendency to attain a completely filled valence shell.
Let us have a look at the electronic configuration of noble gases and
some metals and non-metals.
We can see fr om Table . that a sodium atom has one electr on in its
outermost shell. If it loses the electron from its M shell then its L shell
now becomes the outermost shell and that has a stable octet. The nucleus
of this atom still has protons but the number of electrons has
become , so there is a net positive charge giving us a sodium cation
Na+. On the other hand chlorine has seven electrons in its outermost shellUse the Table above to answer the following questions about metals
A, B, C and D.
(i)Which is the most reactive metal?
(ii) What would you observe if B is added to a solution of Copper(II)
sulphate?
(iii) Arrange the metals A, B, C and D in the order of decreasing
reactivity.
. Which gas is produced when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a
reactive metal? W rite the chemical r eaction when ir on reacts with dilute
H2SO4.
. What would you observe when zinc is added to a solution of iron(II)
sulphate? Write the chemical r eaction that takes place.Metal Iron(II) sulphate Copper(II) sulphate Zinc sulphate Silver nitrate
A No reaction Displacement
B Displacement No reaction
C No reaction No reaction No reaction Displacement
D No reaction No reaction No reaction No reaction
Metals and Non-metals 47and it requires one more electron to complete its octet. If sodium and chlorine
were to react, the electron lost by sodium could be taken up by chlorine.
After gaining an electron, the chlorine atom gets a unit negative charge,
because its nucleus has protons and there are electrons in its K, L
and M shells. This gives us a chloride anion C1–. So both these elements
can have a give-and-take relation between them as follows (Fig. .).
Na Na + e
,, ,+
(Sodi
um cation )→–
Cl +e Cl
,, ,,
(Chloride anion )– –→
Sodium and chloride ions, being oppositely charged, attract each
other and are held by strong electrostatic forces of attraction to exist as
sodium chloride (NaCl). It should be noted that sodium chloride does
not exist as molecules but aggregates of oppositely charged ions.
Let us see the formation of one more ionic compound, magnesium
chloride (Fig. .) .Table . Electronic configurations of some elements
Type of Element Atomic Number of
element number electrons in shells
K L M N
Noble gases Helium (He)
Neon (Ne)
Argon (Ar)
Metals Sodium (Na)
Magnesium (Mg)
Aluminium (Al)
Potassium (K)
Calcium (Ca)
Non-metals Nitrogen (N)
Oxygen (O)
Fluorine (F)
Phosphorus (P)
Sulphur (S)
Chlorine (Cl)
(Magnesium cation ) →  +
–
, , ,
Cl +e Cl
,, ,,
(Chloride anion )– –
→ 
The compounds formed in this manner by the transfer of electrons
from a metal to a non-metal are known as ionic compounds or
electrovalent compounds. Can you name the cation and anion present
in MgCl2?
. Proper ties of Ionic Compounds
To learn about the properties of ionic compounds, let us perform the
following Take samples of sodium chloride, potassium iodide, barium
chloride or any other salt from the science laboratory.
What is the physical state of these salts?
Take a small amount of a sample on a metal spatula and
heat directly on the flame (Fig. .). Repeat with other samples.
What did you observe? Did the samples impart any colour
to the flame? Do these compounds melt?
Try to dissolve the samples in water , petr ol and ker osene.
Are they soluble?
Make a circuit as shown in Fig. . and insert the electrodes
into a solution of one salt. What did you observe? Test the
other salt samples too in this manner .
What is your inference about the nature of these
compounds?Heating a salt sample on a
spatula
Testing the conductivity of
a salt solutionTable . Melting and boiling points of some ionic compounds
Ionic Melting point Boiling point
compound (K) (K)
NaCl
LiCl
CaCl21045
CaO
MgCl2981
Metals and Non-metals 49You may have observed the following general pr operties for ionic
compounds—
(i)Physical nature : Ionic compounds are solids and are somewhat
hard because of the strong force of attraction between the positive
and negative ions. These compounds are generally brittle and
break into pieces when pressure is applied.
(ii)Melting and Boiling points : Ionic compounds have high melting
and boiling points (see Table .). This is because a considerable
amount of ener gy is r equir ed to br eak the str ong inter -ionic
attraction.
(iii) Solubility : Electrovalent compounds are generally soluble in
water and insoluble in solvents such as kerosene, petrol, etc.
(iv)Conduction of Electricity : The conduction of electricity through
a solution involves the movement of charged particles. A solution
of an ionic compound in water contains ions, which move to the
opposite electrodes when electricity is passed through the
solution. Ionic compounds in the solid state do not conduct
electricity because movement of ions in the solid is not possible
due to their rigid structure. But ionic compounds conduct
electricity in the molten state. This is possible in the molten state
since the elecrostatic forces of attraction between the oppositely
charged ions are overcome due to the heat. Thus, the ions move
freely and conduct electricity.
?. (i) Write the electr on-dot structur es for sodium, oxygen and
magnesium.
(ii) Show the formation of Na2O and MgO by the transfer of electrons.
(iii) What are the ions present in these compounds?
. Why do ionic compounds have high melting points?
.OCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF METOCCURRENCE OF MET ALS
ALSALS ALSALS
The earth’s crust is the major source of metals. Seawater also contains
some soluble salts such as sodium chloride, magnesium chloride, etc.
The elements or compounds, which occur naturally in the earth’s crust,
are known as minerals. At some places, minerals contain a very high
percentage of a particular metal and the metal can be profitably extracted
from it. These minerals are called ores.
. Extraction of Metals
You have lear nt about the r eactivity series of metals. Having this
knowledge, you can easily understand how a metal is extracted from its
ore. Some metals are found in the earth’s crust in the free state. Some
are found in the form of their compounds. The metals at the bottom of
the activity series are the least reactive. They are often found in a free
free state. Copper and silver are also found in the combined state as
their sulphide or oxide ores. The metals at the top of the activity series
(K, Na, Ca, Mg and Al) are so reactive that they are never found in
nature as free elements. The metals in the middle of the activity series
(Zn, Fe, Pb, etc.) are moderately reactive. They are found in the earth’s
crust mainly as oxides, sulphides or carbonates. Y ou will find that
the ores of many metals are oxides. This is because oxygen is a very
reactive element and is very abundant on the earth.
Thus on th e basis of reactivity, we can group the metals into the
following three categories (Fig. .) – (i) Metals of low reactivity; (ii) Metals
of medium reactivity; (iii) Metals of high reactivity. Different techniques
are to be used for obtaining the metals falling in each category.K
Na
Ca
Mg
Al
Zn
Fe
Pb
Cu
Ag
AuReduction using
carbon
Found in native
stateElectrolysis
related metallurgy
. Enrichment of Ores
Ores mined from the earth are usually contaminated with large amounts
of impurities such as soil, sand, etc., called gangue. The impurities must
be removed from the ore prior to the extraction of the metal. The processesSeveral steps are involved in the extraction of pure metal from
ores. A summary of these steps is given in Fig. Each step is
explained in detail in the following sections.
Metals and Non-metals 51used for removing the gangue from the ore are based on the differences
between the physical or chemical properties of the gangue and the ore.
Different separation techniques are accordingly employed.
. Extracting Metals Low in the Metals low in the activity series are very unreactive. The oxides of these
metals can be reduced to metals by heating alone. For example, cinnabar
(HgS) is an ore of mer cury. When it is heated in air , it is first converted
into mercuric oxide (HgO). Mercuric oxide is then reduced to mercury
on further heating.
2HgS(s) + 3O (g) 2HgO(s) + 2SO (g) 2Heat →  
2HgO(s) 2Hg(l) + O (g)2Heat →  
Similarly, copper which is found as Cu2S in nature can be obtained
from its or e by just heating in air .
2Cu S + 3O (g) 2Cu O(s) + 2SO (g)
2Cu O + Cu S
2Heat
Heat →  
 →    6Cu(s) + SO (g)
. Extracting Metals in the Middle of the The metals in the middle of the activity series such as iron, zinc, lead,
copper , are moderately r eactive. These ar e usually pr esent as sulphides
or carbonates in nature. It is easier to obtain a metal from its oxide, as
compared to its sulphides and carbonates. Therefore, prior to reduction,
the metal sulphides and carbonates must be converted into metal
oxides. The sulphide ores are converted into oxides by heating strongly
in the pr esence of excess air . This pr ocess is known as r oasting. The
carbonate ores are changed into oxides by heating strongly in limited
air. This pr ocess is known as calcination. The chemical r eaction that
takes place during roasting and calcination of zinc ores can be shown
as follows –
Roasting
2ZnS(s) + 3O (g) 2ZnO(s) + 2SO (g) 2Heat →  
Calcination
ZnCO (s) ZnO(s) + CO (g) 2Heat →  
The metal oxides are then reduced to the corresponding metals by
using suitable reducing agents such as carbon. For example, when zinc
oxide is heated with carbon, it is reduced to metallic zinc.
ZnO(s) + C(s) → Zn(s) + CO(g)
You ar e already familiar with the pr ocess of oxidation and r eduction
explained in the first Chapter . Obtaining metals fr om their compounds
is also a reduction process.
Besides using carbon (coke) to reduce metal oxides to metals,
sometimes displacement reactions can also be used. The highly reactive
metals such as sodium, calcium, aluminium, etc., are used as reducing
compounds. For example, when manganese dioxide is heated with
aluminium powder , the following reaction takes place –
3MnO2(s) + 4Al(s) → 3Mn(l) + 2Al2O3(s) + Heat
Can you identify the substances that are getting oxidised
and reduced?
These displacement reactions are highly exothermic. The
amount of heat evolved is so large that the metals are produced
in the molten state. In fact, the reaction of iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3)
with aluminium is used to join railway tracks or cracked
machine parts. This reaction is known as the thermit reaction.
Fe2O3(s) + 2Al(s) → 2Fe(l) + Al2O3(s) + Heat
. Extracting Metals towards the T op of the
The metals high up in the reactivity series are very reactive. They cannot
be obtained from their compounds by heating with carbon. For example,
carbon cannot reduce the oxides of sodium, magnesium, calcium,
aluminium, etc., to the respective metals. This is because these metals
have more affinity for oxygen than carbon. These metals are obtained
by electrolytic reduction. For example, sodium, magnesium and calcium
are obtained by the electrolysis of their molten chlorides. The metals
are deposited at the cathode (the negatively charged electrode), whereas,
chlorine is liberated at the anode (the positively charged electrode). The
reactions are –
At cathode Na+ + e–→Na
At anode 2Cl –→Cl2 + 2e–
Similarly, aluminium is obtained by the electrolytic reduction of
aluminium oxide.
. Refining of Metals
The metals produced by various reduction processes
described above are not very pure. They contain
impurities, which must be removed to obtain pure metals.
The most widely used method for refining impure metals
is electrolytic refining.
Electrolytic Refining: Electrolytic Refining: Electrolytic Refining: Electrolytic Refining: Electrolytic Refining: Many metals, such as copper , zinc,
tin, nickel, silver , gold, etc., ar e refined electr olytically. In
this process, the impure metal is made the anode and a
thin strip of pure metal is made the cathode. A solution of
the metal salt is used as an electrolyte. The apparatus is
set up as shown in Fig. . On passing the current
through the electrolyte, the pure metal from the anode
dissolves into the electrolyte. An equivalent amount of pure
Thermit process for
joining railway tracks
Electr olytic r efining of copper . The
electrolyte is a solution of acidified copper
sulphate. The anode is impur e copper ,
whereas, the cathode is a strip of pure
copper . On passing electric curr ent, pur e
copper is deposited on the cathode.
Metals and Non-metals 53metal from the electrolyte is deposited on the cathode. The soluble
impurities go into the solution, whereas, the insoluble impurities settle
down at the bottom of the anode and are known as anode mud.
. Define the following terms.
(i)Mineral (ii) Ore (iii) Gangue
. Name two metals which are found in nature in the free state.
. What chemical process is used for obtaining a metal from its oxide?
Take three test tubes and place clean iron nails
in each of them.
Label these test tubes A, B and C. Pour some
water in test tube A and cork it.
Pour boiled distilled water in test tube B, add
about mL of oil and cork it. The oil will float on
water and prevent the air from dissolving in the
water .
Put some anhydrous calcium chloride in
test tube C and cork it. Anhydrous calcium
chloride will absorb the moisture, if any, from
the air . Leave these test tubes for a few days and
then observe (Fig. .).
Investigating the conditions under which iron
rusts. In tube A, both air and water are
present. In tube B, there is no air dissolved
in the water . In tube C, the air is dry .You will observe that iron nails rust in test tube A,
but they do not rust in test tubes B and C. In the test
tube A, the nails ar e exposed to both air and water . In
the test tube B, the nails ar e exposed to only water , and
the nails in test tube C ar e exposed to dry air . What
does this tell us about the conditions under which iron
articles rust??
. CORROSION3. CORROSION3. CORROSION3. CORROSION3. CORROSION
You hav e lear nt the following about corr osion in Chapter –
Silver articles become black after some time when exposed to air .
This is because it reacts with sulphur in the air to form a coating
of silver sulphide.
Copper reacts with moist carbon dioxide in the air and slowly loses
its shiny brown surface and gains a green coat. This green
substance is basic copper carbonate.
Iron when exposed to moist air for a long time acquires a coating
of a brown flaky substance called rust.
Let us find ou t the conditions under which iron rusts.
A B C
jewellery. It is alloyed with either silver or copper to make it hard. Generally, in India,
carat gold is used for making ornaments. It means that parts of pure gold is
alloyed with parts of either copper or silver .
If one of the metals is mercury, then the alloy is known as an
amalgam. The electrical conductivity and melting point of an alloy is
less than that of pure metals. For example, brass, an alloy of copper and
zinc (Cu and Zn), and bronze, an alloy of copper and tin (Cu and Sn), are
not good conductors of electricity whereas copper is used for making
electrical cir cuits. Solder , an alloy of lead and tin (Pb and Sn), has a low
melting point and is used for welding electrical wir es together .
. Prevention of Corrosion
The rusting of iron can be prevented by painting, oiling, greasing,
galvanising, chrome plating, anodising or making alloys.
Galvanisation is a method of protecting steel and iron from rusting
by coating them with a thin layer of zinc. The galvanised article is
protected against rusting even if the zinc coating is broken. Can you
reason this out?
Alloying is a very good method of improving the properties of a metal.
We can get the desir ed pr operties by this method. For example, iron is
the most widely used metal. But it is never used in its pure state. This is
because pure iron is very soft and stretches easily when hot. But, if it is
mixed with a small amount of carbon (about . %), it becomes hard
and strong. When iron is mixed with nickel and chromium, we get
stainless steel, which is hard and does not rust. Thus, if iron is mixed
with some other substance, its properties change. In fact, the properties
of any metal can be changed if it is mixed with some other substance.
The substance added may be a metal or a non-metal. An alloy is a
homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a non-
metal. It is prepared by first melting the primary metal, and then,
dissolving the other elements in it in definite proportions. It is then cooled
to room temperature.
Iron pillar at DelhiThe wonder of ancient Indian metallurgy
The iron pillar near the Qutub Minar in Delhi was built more
than years ago by the iron workers of India. They had
developed a process which prevented iron from rusting. For
its quality of rust resistance it has been examined by scientists
from all parts of the world. The iron pillar is m high and
weighs tonnes ( kg).More to Know!
Metals and Non-metals 55In which cases will you find displacement reactions taking place?
. Which metals do not corrode easily?
. What are alloys??. Metallic oxides of zinc, magnesium and copper were heated with the
following metals.
Metal Zinc Magnesium Copper
Zinc oxide
Magnesium oxide
Copper oxide
What y ou hav e learnt
Elements can be classified as metals and non-metals.
Metals are lustrous, malleable, ductile and are good conductors of heat and
electricity. They are solids at room temperature, except mercury which is a liquid.
Metals can form positive ions by losing electrons to non-metals.
Metals combine with oxygen to form basic oxides. Aluminium oxide and zinc oxide
show the properties of both basic as well as acidic oxides. These oxides are known
as amphoteric oxides.
Different metals have different reactivities with water and dilute acids.
A list of common metals arranged in order of their decreasing reactivity is known
as an activity series.
Metals above hydrogen in the acids.
A more reactive metal displaces a less reactive metal from its salt solution.
Metals occur in nature as free elements or in the form of their compounds.
The extraction of metals from their ores and then refining them for use is known
as metallurgy.
An alloy is a homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a
non-metal.
The surface of some metals, such as iron, is corroded when they are exposed to
moist air for a long period of time. This phenomenon is known as corrosion.
Non-metals have properties opposite to that of metals. They are neither malleable
nor ductile. They are bad conductors of heat and electricity, except for graphite,
which conducts electricity.
metals.
Non-metals form oxides which are either acidic or neutral.
Non-metals do not displace hydrogen from dilute acids. They react with hydrogen
to form hydrides.
EXERCISES
.Which of the following pairs will give displacement reactions?
(a) NaCl solution and copper metal
(b) MgCl2 solution and aluminium metal
(c)FeSO4 solution and silver metal
(d) AgNO3 solution and copper metal.
.Which of the following methods is suitable for preventing an iron frying pan from
rusting?
(a) Applying grease
(b) Applying paint
(c)Applying a coating of zinc
(d) All of the above.
.An element reacts with oxygen to give a compound with a high melting point. This
compound is also soluble in water . The element is likely to be
(a) calcium
(b) carbon
(c)silicon
(d) iron.
.Food cans are coated with tin and not with zinc because
(a) zinc is costlier than tin.
(b) zinc has a higher melting point than tin.
(c)zinc is more reactive than tin.
(d) zinc is less reactive than tin.
.You ar e given a hammer , a battery, a bulb, wir es and a switch.
(a) How could you use them to distinguish between samples of metals and
non-metals?
(b) Assess the usefulness of these tests in distinguishing between metals and
non-metals.
.What are amphoteric oxides? Give two examples of amphoteric oxides.
.Name two metals which will displace hydrogen from dilute acids, and two metals
which will not.
Metals and Non-metals .In the electrolytic refining of a metal M, what would you take as the anode, the
cathode and the electrolyte?
.Pratyush took sulphur powder on a spatula and heated it. He collected the gas
evolved by inverting a test tube over it, as shown in figure below.
(a) What will be the action of gas on
(i)dry litmus paper?
(ii)moist litmus paper?
(b) Write a balanced chemical
equation for the reaction
taking place.
.State two ways to prevent the
rusting of iron.
.What type of oxides are formed when
non-metals combine with oxygen?
.Give reasons
(a) Platinum, gold and silver are
used to make jewellery.
(b) Sodium, potassium and
lithium are stored under oil.
(c) Aluminium is a highly reactive
metal, yet it is used to make
utensils for cooking.
(d) Carbonate and sulphide ores
are usually converted into
oxides during the process of
extraction.
.You must have seen tar nished copper vessels being cleaned with lemon or tamarind
juice. Explain why these sour substances are effective in cleaning the vessels.
.Differentiate between metal and non-metal on the basis of their chemical properties.
.A man went door to door posing as a goldsmith. He promised to bring back the
glitter of old and dull gold ornaments. An unsuspecting lady gave a set of gold
bangles to him which he dipped in a particular solution. The bangles sparkled
like new but their weight was reduced drastically. The lady was upset but after a
futile argument the man beat a hasty retreat. Can you play the detective to find
out the nature of the solution he had used?
.Give reasons why copper is used to make hot water tanks and not steel (an alloy
of iron).Collection of gas Compounds4 CHAPTER
In the last Chapter , we came to know many compounds of importance
to us. In this Chapter we will study about some more interesting
compounds and their properties. Also, we shall be learning about carbon,
an element which is of immense significance to us in both its elemental
form and in the combined form.
Things made Things made Others
of metal of glass/clayMake a list of ten things you have used
or consumed since the morning.
Compile this list with the lists made by
your classmates and then sort the items
into the adjacent Table.
If there are items which are made up of
more than one material, put them into
both the relevant columns of the table.
Look at the items that come in the last column of the above table
filled by you – your teacher will be able to tell you that most of them are
made up of compounds of carbon. Can you think of a method to test
this? What would be the product if a compound containing carbon is
burnt? Do you know of any test to confirm this?
Food, clothes, medicines, books, or many of the things that you listed
are all based on this versatile element carbon. In addition, all living
structures are carbon based. The amount of carbon present in the earth’s
crust and in the atmosphere is quite meagre. The earth’s crust has only
.% carbon in the form of minerals (like carbonates, hydrogen-
carbonates, coal and petroleum) and the atmosphere has .% of carbon
dioxide. In spite of this small amount of carbon available in nature, the
importance of carbon seems to be immense. In this Chapter , we will know
about the properties of carbon which make carbon so important to us.
. BONDING IN CARBON – THE CO VALENT BOND
In the pr evious Chapter , we have studied the pr operties of ionic
compounds. W e saw that ionic compounds have high melting and boiling
points and conduct electricity in solution or in the molten state. W e also
Carbon and its Compounds 59saw how the nature of bonding in ionic compounds explains these
properties. Let us now study the properties of some carbon compounds.
Most carbon compounds are poor conductors of electricity as we
have seen in Chapter . From the data
given in Table . on the boiling and
melting points of the carbon compounds,
we find that these compounds have low
melting and boiling points as compared
to ionic compounds (Chapter ). W e can
conclude that the forces of attraction
between the molecules are not very
strong. Since these compounds are
largely non-conductors of electricity, we
can conclude that the bonding in these
compounds does not give rise to any ions.
In Class IX, we learnt about the
combining capacity of various elements and how it depends on the
number of valence electrons. Let us now look at the electronic
configuration of carbon. The atomic number of carbon is . What would
be the distribution of electrons in various shells of carbon? How many
valence electrons will carbon have?
We know that the r eactivity of elements is explained as their tendency
to attain a completely filled outer shell, that is, attain noble gas
configuration. Elements forming ionic compounds achieve this by either
gaining or losing electrons from the outermost shell. In the case of carbon,
it has four electrons in its outermost shell and needs to gain or lose four
electrons to attain noble gas configuration. If it were to gain or lose
electrons –
(i)It could gain four electrons forming C4– anion. But it would be difficult
for the nucleus with six protons to hold on to ten electrons, that is,
four extra electrons.
(ii)It could lose four electrons forming C4+ cation. But it would require
a large amount of energy to remove four electrons leaving behind a
carbon cation with six protons in its nucleus holding on to just two
electrons.
Carbon overcomes this problem by sharing its valence electrons with
other atoms of carbon or with atoms of other elements. Not just carbon,
but many other elements form molecules by sharing electrons in this
manner . The shar ed electr ons ‘belong’ to the outer most shells of both
the atoms and lead to both atoms attaining the noble gas configuration.
Before going on to compounds of carbon, let us look at some simple
molecules formed by the sharing of valence electrons.
The simplest molecule formed in this manner is that of hydrogen.
As you have lear nt earlier , the atomic number of hydrogen is . Hence
hydrogen has one electron in its K shell and it requires one more electron
to fill the K shell. So two hydrogen atoms share their electrons to form a
molecule of hydrogen, H2. This allows each hydrogen atom to attain theTable . Melting points and boiling points of some
compounds of carbon
Compound Melting Boiling
point (K) point (K)
Acetic acid (CH3COOH)
Chloroform (CHCl3)
Ethanol (CH3CH2OH)
Methane (CH4)
Triple bond between
two nitrogen atoms
Double bond between
two oxygen atoms
electronic configuration of the nearest noble gas,
helium, which has two electr ons in its K shell. W e can
depict this using dots or crosses to represent valence
electrons (Fig. .).
The shared pair of electrons is said to constitute a
single covalent bond between the two hydrogen atoms.
A single covalent bond is also represented by a line
between the two atoms, as shown in Fig. .
The atomic number of chlorine is . What would be its electronic
configuration and its valency? Chlorine forms a diatomic molecule, Cl2.
Can you draw the electron dot structure for this molecule? Note that
only the valence shell electrons need to be depicted.
In the case of oxygen, we see the formation of a double bond between
two oxygen atoms. This is because an atom of oxygen has six electrons
in its L shell (the atomic number of oxygen is eight) and it requires two
more electrons to complete its octet. So each atom of oxygen shares two
electrons with another atom of oxygen to give us the structure shown in
Fig. . The two electrons contributed by each oxygen atom give rise to
two shared pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a double bond
between the two atoms.
Can you now depict a molecule of water showing the nature
of bonding between one oxygen atom and two hydrogen
atoms? Does the molecule have single bonds or double bonds?
What would happen in the case of a diatomic molecule of
nitrogen? Nitrogen has the atomic number . What would be
its electronic configuration and its combining capacity? In
order to attain an octet, each nitrogen atom in a molecule of
nitrogen contributes three electrons giving rise to three shared
pairs of electrons. This is said to constitute a triple bond
between the two atoms. The electron dot structure of N2 and
its triple bond can be depicted as in Fig. .
A molecule of ammonia has the formula NH3. Can you draw
the electron dot structure for this molecule showing how all
four atoms achieve noble gas configuration? Will the molecule
have single, double or triple bonds?
Let us now take a look at methane, which is a compound
of carbon. Methane is widely used as a fuel and is a major
component of bio-gas and Compressed Natural Gas (CNG). It
is also one of the simplest compounds formed by carbon.
Methane has a formula CH4. Hydrogen, as you know, has a
valency of . Carbon is tetravalent because it has four valence
electrons. In order to achieve noble gas configuration, carbon
shares these electrons with four atoms of hydrogen as shown
in Fig. .
Such bonds which are formed by the sharing of an electron pair
between two atoms are known as covalent bonds. Covalently bonded
molecules ar e seen to have str ong bonds within the molecule, but inter -
molecular forces are weak. This gives rise to the low melting and boiling
A molecule of hydrogen
Single bond between
two hydrogen atoms
Carbon and its Compounds 61These two different structures result in diamond and graphite having very different
physical properties even though their chemical properties are the same. Diamond is
the hardest substance known while graphite is smooth and slippery. Graphite is also
a very good conductor of electricity unlike other non-metals that you studied in the
previous Chapter .
Diamonds can be synthesised by subjecting pure carbon to very high pressure and
temperature. These synthetic diamonds are small but are otherwise indistinguishable
from natural diamonds.
Fullerenes form another class of carbon allotropes. The first one to be identified was
C- which has carbon atoms arranged in the shape of a football. Since this looked
like the geodesic dome designed by the US ar chitect Buckminster Fuller , the molecule
was named fullerene.The structure of diamondThe structure of C-
Buckminsterfullerene
?. What would be the electron dot structure of carbon dioxide which has
the formula CO2?
. What would be the electron dot structure of a molecule of sulphur which
is made up of eight atoms of sulphur? ( Hint – The eight atoms of sulphur
are joined together in the form of a ring.)
Electron dot structure for
methanepoints of these compounds. Since the electrons are shared between
atoms and no charged particles are formed, such covalent compounds
are generally poor conductors of electricity.
Allotropes of carbon
The element carbon occurs in different forms in nature with
widely varying physical properties. Both diamond and
graphite are formed by carbon atoms, the difference lies in
the manner in which the carbon atoms are bonded to one
another . In diamond, each carbon atom is bonded to four
other carbon atoms forming a rigid three-dimensional
structure. In graphite, each carbon atom is bonded to three
other carbon atoms in the same plane giving a hexagonal array.
One of these bonds is a double-bond, and thus the valency of
carbon is satisfied. Graphite structure is formed by the
hexagonal arrays being placed in layers one above the other .More to Know!
The structure of graphite
We have seen the for mation of covalent bonds by the sharing of
electr ons in various elements and compounds. W e have also seen the
structure of a simple carbon compound, methane. In the beginning
of the Chapter , we saw how many things we use contain carbon. In
fact, we ourselves are made up of carbon compounds. The numbers
of carbon compounds whose formulae are known to chemists was
recently estimated to be in million s! This outnumbers by a large
margin the compounds for med by all the other elements put together .
Why is it that this property is seen in carbon and no other element?
The nature of the covalent bond enables carbon to form a large number
of compounds. Two factors noticed in the case of carbon ar e –
(i)Carbon has the unique ability to form bonds with other atoms of
carbon, giving rise to large molecules. This property is called
catenation. These compounds may have long chains of carbon,
branched chains of carbon or even carbon atoms arranged in rings.
In addition, carbon atoms may be linked by single, double or triple
bonds. Compounds of carbon, which are linked by only single
bonds between the carbon atoms are called saturated compounds.
Compounds of carbon having double or triple bonds between their
carbon atoms are called unsaturated compounds.
No other element exhibits the property of catenation to the extent
seen in carbon compounds. Silicon forms compounds with
hydrogen which have chains of upto seven or eight atoms, but these
compounds are very reactive. The carbon-carbon bond is very strong
and hence stable. This gives us the large number of compounds
with many carbon atoms linked to each other .
(ii)Since carbon has a valency of four , it is capable of bonding with
four other atoms of carbon or atoms of some other mono-valent
element. Compounds of carbon are formed with oxygen, hydrogen,
nitrogen, sulphur , chlorine and many other elements giving rise to
compounds with specific properties which depend on the elements
other than carbon present in the molecule.
Again the bonds that carbon forms with most other elements are
very strong making these compounds exceptionally stable. One
reason for the formation of strong bonds by carbon is its small size.
This enables the nucleus to hold on to the shared pairs of electrons
strongly. The bonds formed by elements having bigger atoms are
much weaker . Life Processes
How do we tell the difference between what is alive and what is not
alive? If we see a dog running, or a cow chewing cud, or a man shouting loudly on the street, we know that these are living beings. What if the dog or the cow or the man were asleep? We would still think that they were alive, but how did we know that? We see them br eathing, and we know that they are alive. What about plants? How do we know that they ar e alive? W e see them gr een, some of us will say. But what about plants that have leaves of colours other than green? They grow over time, so we know that they are alive, some will say. In other words, we tend to think of some sort of movement, either growth-related or not, as common evidence for being alive. But a plant that is not visibly growing is still alive, and some animals can breathe without visible movement. So using visible movement as the defining characteristic of life is not enough. Movements over very small scales will be invisible to the naked eye – movements of molecules, for example. Is this invisible molecular movement necessary for life? If we ask this question to professional biologists, they will say yes. In fact, viruses do not show any molecular movement in them (until they infect some cell), and that is partly why there is a controversy about whether they are truly alive or not. Why ar e molecular movements needed for life? W e have seen in earlier classes that living organisms are well-organised structures; they can have tissues, tissues have cells, cells have smaller components in them, and so on. Because of the effects of the environment, this organised, ordered nature of living structures is very likely to keep breaking down
over time. If order breaks down, the organism will no longer be alive. So
living creatures must keep repairing and maintaining their structures.
Since all these structures are made up of molecules, they must move
molecules around all the time.
What are the maintenance processes in living organisms?
Let us explore. WHAT ARE LIFE PROCESSES?
The maintenance functions of living organisms must go on even when
they ar e not doing anything particular . Even when we ar e just sitting in
The processes which together perform this maintenance job are
life processes.
Since these maintenance processes are needed to prevent damage
and break-down, energy is needed for them. This energy comes from
outside the body of the individual organism. So there must be a process
to transfer a source of energy from outside the body of the organism,
which we call food, to the inside, a process we commonly call nutrition.
If the body size of the organisms is to grow, additional raw material will
also be needed from outside. Since life on earth depends on carbon-
based molecules, most of these food sources are also carbon-based.
Depending on the complexity of these carbon sources, different
organisms can then use different kinds of nutritional processes.
The outside sources of energy could be quite varied, since the
environment is not under the control of the individual organism. These
sources of energy, therefore, need to be broken down or built up in the
body, and must be finally converted to a uniform source of energy that
can be used for the various molecular movements needed for
maintaining living str uctures, as well as to the kind of molecules the
body needs to grow. For this, a series of chemical reactions in the
body are necessary. Oxidising-reducing reactions are some of the most
common chemical means to break -down molecules. For this, many
organisms use oxygen sourced from outside the body. The process
of acquiring oxygen from outside the body, and to use it in the process
of break -down of food sources for cellular needs, is what we call
respiration.
In the case of a single-celled organism, no specific organs for taking
in food, exchange of gases or removal of wastes may be needed because
the entire surface of the organism is in contact with the environment.
But what happens when the body size of the organism increases and
the body design becomes more complex? In multi-cellular organisms,
all the cells may not be in direct contact with the surrounding
environment. Thus, simple diffusion will not meet the requirements of
all the cells.
We have seen previously how, in multi-cellular organisms, various
body parts have specialised in the functions they per form. We are familiar
with the idea of these specialised tissues, and with their organisation in
the body of the organism. It is therefore not surprising that the uptake
of food and of oxygen will also be the function of specialised tissues.
However , this poses a pr oblem, since the food and oxygen ar e now taken
up at one place in the body of the organisms, while all parts of the body
need them. This situation creates a need for a transportation system for
carrying food and oxygen from one place to another in the body.
When chemical reactions use the carbon source and the oxygen for
energy generation, they create by-products that are not only useless
for the cells of the body, but could even be harmful. These waste by-
products are therefore needed to be removed from the body and discarded
outside by a process called excretion. Again, if the basic rules for body
excretion will be developed, which means that the transportation system
will need to transport waste away from cells to this excretory tissue.
Let us consider these various processes, so essential to maintain
life, one by one.
?. Why is diffusion insufficient to meet the oxygen requirements of multi-
cellular organisms like humans?
. What criteria do we use to decide whether something is alive?
. What are outside raw materials used for by an organism?
. What processes would you consider essential for maintaining life?
Nutrition.
When we walk or ride a bicycle, we are using up energy. Even when we
are not doing any apparent activity, energy is needed to maintain a
state of or der in our body. W e also need materials fr om outside in or der
to grow, develop, synthesise protein and other substances needed in
the body. This source of energy and materials is the food we eat.
How do living things get their food?
The general requirement for energy and materials is common in all
organisms, but it is fulfilled in different ways. Some organisms use simple
food material obtained from inorganic sources in the form of carbon
dioxide and water . These or ganisms, the autotr ophs, include gr
een
plants and some bacteria. Other organisms utilise complex substances.
These complex substances have to be broken down into simpler ones
before they can be used for the upkeep and growth of the body. To
achieve this, organisms use bio-catalysts called enzymes. Thus, the
heterotrophs survival depends directly or indirectly on autotrophs.
Heterotrophic organisms include animals and fungi.
. Autotrophic Nutrition
Carbon and energy requirements of the autotrophic organism are
fulfilled by photosynthesis. It is the process by which autotrophs take
in substances from the outside and convert them into stored forms of
energy. This material is taken in the form of carbon dioxide and water
which is converted into carbohydrates in the presence of sunlight and
chlorophyll. Carbohydrates are utilised for providing energy to the plant.
We will study how this takes place in the next section. The carbohydrates
which are not used immediately are stored in the form of starch, which
serves as the internal energy reserve to be used as and when required
by the plant. A somewhat similar situation is seen in us where some of
the energy derived from the food we eat is stored in our body in the form
of glycogen.
photosynthesis. The following events occur during this process –
Variegated leaf (a) before
and (b) after starch testCross-section of a leaf
Take a potted plant with variegated leaves – for example, money plant
or crotons.
Keep the plant in a dark room for three days so that all the starch
gets used up.
Now keep the plant in sunlight for about six hours.
Pluck a leaf from the plant. Mark the green areas in it and trace them
on a sheet of paper .
Dip the leaf in boiling water for a few minutes.
After this, immerse it in a beaker containing alcohol.
Carefully place the above beaker in a water -bath and heat till the
alcohol begins to boil.
What happens to the colour of the leaf? What is the colour of the
solution?
Now dip the leaf in a dilute solution of iodine for a few minutes.
Take out the leaf and rinse off the iodine solution.
Observe the colour of the leaf and compare this with the tracing of
the leaf done in the beginning (Fig. .).
What can you conclude about the presence of starch in various areas
of the leaf?(i)Absorption of light energy by
chlorophyll.
(ii)Conversion of light energy to chemical
energy and splitting of water molecules
into hydrogen and oxygen.
(iii)Reduction of carbon dioxide to
carbohydrates.
These steps need not take place one after
the other immediately. For example, desert
plants take up carbon dioxide at night and
prepare an intermediate which is acted upon
by the energy absorbed by the chlorophyll
during the day.
Let us see how each of the components of
the above reaction are necessary for
photosynthesis.
If you carefully observe a cross-section of a
leaf under the microscope (shown in Fig. .),
you will notice that some cells contain green
dots. These green dots are cell organelles called
chloroplasts which contain chlorophyll. Let us
do an activity which demonstrates that
chlorophyll is essential for photosynthesis.
obtains carbon dioxide. In Class IX,
we had talked about stomata (Fig. .)
which are tiny pores present on the
surface of the leaves. Massive amounts
of gaseous exchange takes place in the
leaves through these pores for the
purpose of photosynthesis. But it is
important to note here that exchange
of gases occurs across the surface of
stems, roots and leaves as well. Since
large amounts of water can also be lost
through these stomata, the plant
closes these pores when it does not
need carbon dioxide for photosynthesis. The opening and closing of the
pore is a function of the guard cells. The guard cells swell when water
flows into them, causing the stomatal pore to open. Similarly the pore
closes if the guard cells shrink.
Take two healthy potted plants
which are nearly the same size.
Keep them in a dark room for
three days.
Now place each plant on
separate glass plates. Place a
watch-glass containing potassium
hydroxide by the side of one of
the plants. The potassium
hydroxide is used to absorb
carbon dioxide.
Cover both plants with separate
bell-jars as shown in Fig. .
Use vaseline to seal the bottom
of the jars to the glass plates so
that the set-up is air -tight.
Keep the plants in sunlight for
about two hours.
Pluck a leaf from each plant and check for the presence of starch as in the above activity.
Do both the leaves show the presence of the same amount of starch?
What can you conclude from this activity?Based on the two activities performed above, can we design an experiment to demonstrate that sunlight is essential for photosynthesis?
So far , we have talked about how autotr ophs meet their energy
requirements. But they also need other raw materials for building their
body. Water used in photosynthesis is taken up fr om the soil by the
roots in terrestrial plants. Other materials like nitrogen, phosphorus,
iron and magnesium are taken up from the soil. Nitrogen is an essential
element used in the synthesis of proteins and other compounds. This isExperimental set-up (a) with potassium
hydroxide (b) without potassium hydroxide
(a) (b)
organic compounds which have been prepared by bacteria from
atmospheric nitrogen.
. Heterotrophic Nutrition
Each organism is adapted to its environment. The form of nutrition
differs depending on the type and availability of food material as well
as how it is obtained by the organism. For example, whether the food
source is stationary (such as grass) or mobile (such as a deer), would
allow for differences in how the food is accessed and what is the nutritive
apparatus used by a cow and a lion. There is a range of strategies by
which the food is taken in and used by the organism. Some organisms
break- down the food material outside the body and then absorb it.
Examples are fungi like bread moulds, yeast and mushrooms. Others
take in whole material and break it down inside their bodies. What can
be taken in and broken down depends on the body design and
functioning. Some other organisms derive nutrition from plants or
animals without killing them. This parasitic nutritive strategy is used
by a wide variety of or ganisms like cuscuta (amar -bel), ticks, lice,
leeches and tape-worms.
. How do Organisms obtain their Nutrition?
Since the food and the way it is obtained dif fer, the digestive system is
different in various organisms. In single-celled organisms, the food
may be taken in by the entire surface. But as the complexity of the
organism increases, different parts become specialised to perform
different functions. For example,
Amoeba takes in food using
temporary finger -like extensions of the cell sur face which fuse over
the food particle forming a food-vacuole (Fig. .). Inside the food-
vacuole, complex substances are broken down into simpler ones
which then diffuse into the cytoplasm. The remaining undigested
material is moved to the surface of the cell and thrown out. In
Paramoecium , which is also a unicellular organism, the cell has a
definite shape and food is taken in at a specific spot. Food is moved
to this spot by the movement of cilia which cover the entire surface
of the cell.
Nutrition in Human Beings
The alimentary canal is basically a long tube extending from the mouth
to the anus. In Fig. ., we can see that the tube has different parts.
Various r egions ar e specialised to per form dif ferent functions. What
happens to the food once it enters our body? W e shall discuss this
process here.Nutrition in Amoeba
Take mL starch solution (%) in two test tubes (A and B).
Add mL saliva to test tube A and leave both test tubes undisturbed
for - minutes.
Now add a few drops of dilute iodine solution to the test tubes.
In which test tube do you observe a colour change?
What does this indicate about the presence or absence of starch
in the two test tubes?
What does this tell us about the action of saliva on starch?
We eat various types of food which has to pass thr ough the same
digestive tract. Naturally the food has to be processed to generate
particles which are small and of the same texture. This is achieved by
crushing the food with our teeth. Since the lining of the canal is soft, the
food is also wetted to make its passage smooth. When we eat something
we like, our mouth ‘waters’. This is actually not only water , but a fluid
called saliva secreted by the salivary glands. Another aspect of the food
we ingest is its complex nature. If it is to be absorbed from the alimentary
canal, it has to be broken into smaller molecules. This is done with the
help of biological catalysts called
enzymes. The saliva contains an
enzyme called salivary amylase that
breaks down starch which is a complex
molecule to give simple sugar . The food
is mixed thoroughly with saliva and
moved around the mouth while
chewing by the muscular tongue.
It is necessary to move the food in
a regulated manner along the digestive
tube so that it can be processed
properly in each part. The lining of
canal has muscles that contract
rhythmically in order to push the food
forward. These peristaltic movements
occur all along the gut.
From the mouth, the food is taken
to the stomach through the food-pipe
or oesophagus. The stomach is a large
organ which expands when food
enters it. The muscular walls of the
stomach help in mixing the food
thoroughly with more digestive juices.
The digestion in stomach is taken
care of by the gastric glands present in the wall of the stomach. These
release hydrochloric acid, a protein digesting enzyme called pepsin,
and mucus. The hydrochloric acid creates an acidic medium which
facilitates the action of the enzyme pepsin. What other function do you
think is served by the acid? The mucus protects the inner lining of the
stomach fr om the action of the acid under nor mal conditions. W e
to what has been discussed above?
The exit of food from the stomach is regulated by a sphincter muscle
which releases it in small amounts into the small intestine. From the
stomach, the food now enters the small intestine. This is the longest part
of the alimentary canal which is fitted into a compact space because of
extensive coiling. The length of the small intestine differs in various
animals depending on the food they eat. Herbivores eating grass need a
longer small intestine to allow the cellulose to be digested. Meat is easier
to digest, hence carnivores like tigers have a shorter small intestine.
The small intestine is the site of the complete digestion of
carbohydrates, proteins and fats. It receives the secretions of the liver
and pancreas for this purpose. The food coming from the stomach is
acidic and has to be made alkaline for the pancreatic enzymes to act.
Bile juice from the liver accomplishes this in addition to acting on fats.
Fats are present in the intestine in the form of large globules which makes
it difficult for enzymes to act on them. Bile salts break them down into
smaller globules increasing the efficiency of enzyme action. This is similar
to the emulsifying action of soaps on dirt that we have learnt about in
Chapter . The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice which contains
enzymes like trypsin for digesting proteins and lipase for breaking down
emulsified fats. The walls of the small intestine contain glands which
secrete intestinal juice. The enzymes present in it finally convert the
proteins to amino acids, complex carbohydrates into glucose and fats
into fatty acids and glycerol.
Digested food is taken up by the walls of the intestine. The inner
lining of the small intestine has numer ous finger -like pr ojections called
villi which increase the surface area for absorption. The villi are richly
supplied with blood vessels which take the absorbed food to each and
every cell of the body, where it is utilised for obtaining energy, building
up new tissues and the repair of old tissues.
The unabsorbed food is sent into the large intestine where its wall
absorb more water from this material. The rest of the material is removed
from the body via the anus. The exit of this waste material is regulated
by the anal sphincter .More to Know!Dental caries
Dental caries or tooth decay causes gradual softening of enamel and dentine. It begins
when bacteria acting on sugars produce acids that softens or demineralises the enamel.
Masses of bacterial cells together with food particles stick to the teeth to form dental
plaque. Saliva cannot reach the tooth surface to neutralise the acid as plaque covers
the teeth. Brushing the teeth after eating removes the plaque before the bacteria
produce acids. If untreated, microorganisms may invade the pulp, causing
inflammation and infection.
Take some freshly prepared lime
water in a test tube.
Blow air through this lime water .
Note how long it takes for the lime
water to turn milky.
Use a syringe or pichkari to pass air
through some fresh lime water
taken in another test tube (Fig. .).
Note how long it takes for this lime
water to turn milky.
What does this tell us about the
amount of carbon dioxide in the air
that we breathe out?. What are the differences between autotrophic nutrition and heterotrophic
nutrition?
. Where do plant s get each of the raw materials required for photosynthesis?
. What is the role of the acid in our stomach?
. What is the function of digestive enzymes?
. How is the small intestine designed to absorb digested food? Take some fruit juice or sugar solution and add some yeast to
this. Take this mixture in a test tube fitted with a one-holed cork.
Fit the cork with a bent glass tube. Dip the free end of the glass
tube into a test tube containing fr eshly pr epared lime water .
What change is observed in the lime water and how long does it
take for this change to occur?
What does this tell us about the products of fermentation?
The food material taken in during the process of nutrition is used in cells to
provide energy for various life processes. Diverse organisms do this in
different ways – some use oxygen to break-down glucose completely
into carbon dioxide and water , some use other pathways that do not
involve oxygen (Fig. .). In all cases, the first step is the break-down of
glucose, a six-carbon molecule, into a three-carbon molecule called
pyruvate. This pr ocess takes place in the cytoplasm. Further , the
pyruvate may be converted into ethanol and carbon dioxide. This process
takes place in yeast during fermentation. Since this process takes place
in the absence of air (oxygen), it is called anaerobic respiration. Break-
down of pyruvate using oxygen takes place in the mitochondria. This(a) Air being passed into lime water with a pichkari/
syringe, (b) air being exhaled into lime water
molecules of carbon dioxide. The other pr oduct is water . Since this
process takes place in the presence of air (oxygen), it is called aerobic
respiration. The release of energy in this aerobic process is a lot greater
than in the anaerobic process. Sometimes, when there is a lack of oxygen
in our muscle cells, another pathway for the break-down of pyruvate is
taken. Here the pyruvate is converted into lactic acid which is also a
three-carbon molecule. This build-up of lactic acid in our muscles during
sudden activity causes cramps.
The energy released during cellular respiration is immediately used
to synthesise a molecule called ATP which is used to fuel all other
activities in the cell. In these processes, ATP is broken down giving rise
to a fixed amount of energy which can drive the endothermic reactions
taking place in the cell.
ATP
ATP is the energy currency for most cellular processes. The energy released during
the process of respiration is used to make an ATP molecule from ADP and inorganic
phosphate.
Endothermic processes in the cell then use this ATP to drive the reactions. When the
terminal phosphate linkage in A
TP is br oken using water , the energy equivalent to
. kJ/mol is released.
Think of how a battery can provide energy for many different kinds of uses. It can be
used to obtain mechanical energy, light energy, electrical energy and so on. Similarly,
ATP can be used in the cells for the contraction of muscles, protein synthesis,
conduction of nervous impulses and many other activities.
Since the aerobic respiration pathway depends on oxygen, aerobic
organisms need to ensur e that ther e is suf ficient intake of oxygen. W e
have seen that plants exchange gases through stomata, and the large
inter-cellular spaces ensur e that all cells ar e in contact with air . Carbon
dioxide and oxygen are exchanged by diffusion here. They can go intoMore to Know!
depends upon the environmental conditions and the requirements of
the plant. At night, when there is no photosynthesis occurring, CO2
elimination is the major exchange activity going on. During the day,
CO2 generated during respiration is used up for photosynthesis, hence
there is no CO2 release. Instead, oxygen release is the major event at
this time.
Animals have evolved different organs for the uptake of oxygen
from the environment and for getting rid of the carbon dioxide
produced. Terrestrial animals can breathe the oxygen in the
atmosphere, but animals that live in water need to use the oxygen
dissolved in water .
Observe fish in an aquarium. They open and close their mouths
and the gill-slits (or the operculum which covers the gill-slits)
behind their eyes also open and close. Are the timings of the
opening and closing of the mouth and gill-slits coordinated in some
manner?
Count the number of times the fish opens and closes its mouth in
a minute.
Compare this to the number of times you breathe in and out in a
minute.
Since the amount of dissolved oxygen is fairly low compared
to the amount of oxygen in the air , the rate of br
eathing in aquatic
organisms is much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms.
Fishes take in water through their mouths and force it past the
gills where the dissolved oxygen is taken up by blood.
Terrestrial organisms use the oxygen in the atmosphere for
respiration. This oxygen is absorbed by different organs in
different animals. All these organs have a structure that increases
the surface area which is in contact with the oxygen-rich
atmosphere. Since the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
has to take place across this surface, this surface is very fine
and delicate. In order to protect this surface, it is usually placed
within the body, so there have to be passages that will take air
to this area. In addition, there is a mechanism for moving the air
in and out of this area where the oxygen is absorbed.
In human beings (Fig. .), air is taken into the body through
the nostrils. The air passing through the nostrils is filtered by
fine hairs that line the passage. The passage is also lined with
mucus which helps in this process. From here, the air passes
through the throat and into the lungs. Rings of cartilage are
present in the thr oat. These ensure that the air -passage does
not collapse.Using tobacco directly or
any product of tobacco in
the for m of cigar , cigar ettes,
bidis, hookah , gutkha
, etc.,
is harmful. Use of tobacco
most commonly affects the
tongue, lungs, heart and
liver. Smokeless tobacco is
also a major risk factor for
heart attacks, strokes,
pulmonary diseases and
several forms of cancers.
There is a high incidence of
oral cancer in India due to
the chewing of tobacco in
the form of gutkha . Stay
healthy; just say NO to
tobacco and its products!More to Know!
tubes which finally terminate in balloon-like structures which
are called alveoli (singular–alveolus) . The alveoli provide a surface
where the exchange of gases can take place. The walls of the alveoli
contain an extensive network of blood-vessels. As we have seen
in earlier years, when we breathe in, we lift our ribs and flatten
our diaphragm, and the chest cavity becomes larger as a result.
Because of this, air is sucked into the lungs and fills the expanded
alveoli. The blood brings carbon dioxide from the rest of the body
for release into the alveoli, and the oxygen in the alveolar air is
taken up by blood in the alveolar blood vessels to be transported
to all the cells in the body. During the breathing cycle, when air is
taken in and let out, the lungs always contain a residual volume
of air so that there is sufficient time for oxygen to be absorbed
and for the carbon dioxide to be released.
When the body size of animals is large, the diffusion pressure
alone cannot take care of oxygen delivery to all parts of the body.
Instead, respiratory pigments take up oxygen from the air in the
lungs and carry it to tissues which are deficient in oxygen before
releasing it. In human beings, the respiratory pigment is
haemoglobin which has a very high affinity for oxygen. This pigment
is present in the red blood corpuscles. Carbon dioxide is more
soluble in water than oxygen is and hence is mostly transported in
the dissolved form in our blood.
Do You Know?
Smoking is injurious to
health.
Lung cancer is one of
common causes of
deaths in the world. The upper part of respiratory
tract is provided with
small hair -like
structures called cilia.
These cilia help to
remove germs, dust and
other harmful particles
from inhaled air .
Smoking destroys these
hair due to which germs,
dust, smoke and other
harmful chemicals enter
lungs and cause
infection, cough and
even lung cancer .
. TRANSPORT
. Transportation in Human BeingsDo You Know?If the alveolar surface were spread out, it would cover about m2. How much do you think the surface area of your body is? Consider how efficient exchange
of gases becomes because of the large surface available for the exchange to take
place.
If diffusion were to move oxygen in our body, it is estimated that it would take
years for a molecule of oxygen to get to our toes from our lungs. Aren’t you glad
that we have haemoglobin?
?. What advantage over an aquatic organism does a terrestrial organism
have with regard to obtaining oxygen for respiration?
. What are the different ways in which glucose is oxidised to provide
energy in various organisms?
. How is oxygen and carbon dioxide transported in human beings?
. How are the lungs designed in human beings to maximise the area for
exchange of gases?
Visit a health centre in your locality and find out what is the
normal range of haemoglobin content in human beings.
Is it the same for children and adults?
Is there any difference in the haemoglobin levels for men and
women?
Visit a veterinary clinic in your locality. Find out what is the normal
range of haemoglobin content in an animal like the buffalo
or cow.
Is this content different in calves, male and female animals?
Compare the difference seen in male and female human beings
and animals. How would the difference, if any, be explained?
We have seen in pr evious sections that blood transports food, oxygen
and waste materials in our bodies. In Class IX, we learnt about blood
being a fluid connective tissue. Blood consists of a fluid medium called
plasma in which the cells are suspended. Plasma transports food, carbon
dioxide and nitrogenous wastes in dissolved form. Oxygen is carried by
the red blood corpuscles. Many other substances like salts, are also
transported by the blood. We thus need a pumping organ to push blood
around the body, a network of tubes to reach all the tissues and a system
in place to ensure that this network can be repaired if damaged.
Because both oxygen and carbon dioxide have to be transported by the blood, the heart has different chambers to prevent the oxygen-rich blood from mixing with the
blood containing carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide-rich blood has to reach
the lungs for the carbon dioxide to be removed, and the oxygenated blood from
the lungs has to be brought back to the
heart. This oxygen-rich blood is then
pumped to the rest of the body.
We can follow this pr ocess step by
step (Fig. .). Oxygen-rich blood from
the lungs comes to the thin-walled upper
chamber of the heart on the left, the left atrium. The left atrium relaxes
when it is collecting this blood. It then contracts, while the next chamber ,
the left ventricle, relaxes, so that the blood is transferred to it. When the
muscular left ventricle contracts in its turn, the blood is pumped out to
the body. De-oxygenated blood comes from the body to the upper
chamber on the right, the right atrium, as it relaxes. As the right atrium
contracts, the corr esponding lower chamber , the right ventricle, dilates.
This transfers blood to the right ventricle, which in turn pumps it to the
lungs for oxygenation. Since ventricles have to pump blood into various
organs, they have thicker muscular walls than the atria do. V alves ensur e
that blood does not flow backwards when the atria or ventricles contract.
Oxygen enters the blood in the lungs
The separation of the right side and the left side of
the heart is useful to keep oxygenated and de-
oxygenated blood from mixing. Such separation
allows a highly efficient supply of oxygen to the
body. This is useful in animals that have high
energy needs, such as birds and mammals, which
constantly use energy to maintain their body
temperature. In animals that do not use energy
for this purpose, the body temperature depends
on the temperature in the environment. Such
animals, like amphibians or many reptiles have
three-chambered hearts, and tolerate some mixing
of the oxygenated and de-oxygenated blood
streams. Fishes, on the other hand, have only two
chambers to their hearts, and the blood is pumped
to the gills, is oxygenated there, and passes directly
to the rest of the body. Thus, blood goes only once
through the heart in the fish during one cycle of
passage through the body. On the other hand, it goes through the heart
twice during each cycle in other vertebrates. This is known as double
circulation.Our pump — the heart
Schematic sectional
view of the human heart
Schematic representation of transport and exchange
of oxygen and carbon dioxide
Blood pr essur e is measur ed with an instrument called sphygmomanometer . High
blood pressure is also called hypertension and is caused by the constriction of
arterioles, which results in increased resistance to blood flow. It can lead to the rupture
of an artery and internal bleeding.Blood pressure
The force that blood exerts against the wall of a vessel is called blood pressure. This
pressure is much greater in arteries than in veins. The pressure of blood inside the
artery during ventricular systole (contraction) is called systolic pressure and pressure
in artery during ventricular diastole (relaxation) is called diastolic pressure. The normal
systolic pressure is about mm of Hg and diastolic pressure is mm of Hg.
The tubes – blood vessels
Arteries are the vessels which carry blood away from the heart to various
organs of the body. Since the blood emerges from the heart under high
pressur e, the arteries have thick, elastic walls. V eins collect the blood
from different organs and bring it back to the heart. They do not need
thick walls because the blood is no longer under pressure, instead they
have valves that ensure that the blood flows only in one direction.
On reaching an organ or tissue, the artery divides into smaller and
smaller vessels to bring the blood in contact with all the individual cells.
The smallest vessels have walls which are one-cell thick and are called
capillaries. Exchange of material between the blood and surrounding
cells takes place across this thin wall. The capillaries then join together
to form veins that convey the blood away from the organ or tissue.
Maintenance by platelets
What happens if this system of tubes develops a leak? Think about
situations when we are injured and start bleeding. Naturally the loss of
blood from the system has to be minimised. In addition, leakage would
lead to a loss of pressure which would reduce the efficiency of the
around the body and plug these leaks by helping to clot the blood at
these points of injury.
Lymph
There is another type of fluid also involved in transportation. This is
called lymph or tissue fluid. Through the pores present in the walls of
capillaries some amount of plasma, proteins and blood cells escape into
intercellular spaces in the tissues to form the tissue fluid or lymph. It is
similar to the plasma of blood but colourless and contains less protein.
Lymph drains into lymphatic capillaries fr
om the inter cellular spaces,
which join to form large lymph vessels that finally open into larger veins.
Lymph carries digested and absorbed fat fr om intestine and drains excess
fluid from extra cellular space back into the blood.
. T ranspor tation in Plants
We have discussed earlier how plants take in simple compounds such
as CO2 and photosynthesise energy stored in their chlorophyll-containing
organs, namely leaves. The other kinds of raw materials needed for
building plant bodies will also have to be taken up separately. For plants,
the soil is the nearest and richest source of raw materials like nitrogen,
phosphorus and other minerals. The absorption of these substances
therefore occurs through the part in contact with the soil, namely roots.
If the distances between soil-contacting organs and chlorophyll-
containing organs are small, energy and raw materials can easily diffuse
to all parts of the plant body. But if these distances become large because
of changes in plant body design, diffusion processes will not be sufficient
to provide raw material in leaves and energy in roots. A proper system of
transportation is therefore essential in such situations.
Energy needs differ between different body designs. Plants do not
move, and plant bodies have a large proportion of dead cells in many
tissues. As a result, plants have low energy needs, and can use relatively
slow transport systems. The distances over which transport systems
have to operate, however , can be very lar ge in plants such as very tall
trees.
Plant transport systems will move energy stores from leaves and raw
materials from roots. These two pathways are constructed as
independently organised conducting tubes. One, the xylem moves water
and minerals obtained from the soil. The other , phloem transports
products of photosynthesis from the leaves where they are synthesised
to other parts of the plant. W e have studied the structur e of these tissues
in detail in Class IX.
Transport of water
In xylem tissue, vessels and tracheids of the roots, stems and leaves are
interconnected to for m a continuous system of water -conducting
channels reaching all parts of the plant. At the roots, cells in contact
with the soil actively take up ions. This creates a difference in the
concentration of these ions between the r oot and the soil. W ater, therefore,
that there is steady movement of water into root xylem, creating a column
of water that is steadily pushed upwards.
However , this pr essur e by itself is unlikely to be enough to move
water over the heights that we commonly see in plants. Plants use another
strategy to move water in the xylem upwards to the highest points of the
plant body.
Take two small pots of approximately the same size and having
the same amount of soil. One should have a plant in it. Place a
stick of the same height as the plant in the other pot.
Cover the soil in both pots with a plastic sheet so that moisture
cannot escape by evaporation.
Cover both sets, one with the plant and the other with the stick,
with plastic sheets and place in bright sunlight for half an hour .
Do you observe any difference in the two cases?
Provided that the plant has an adequate
supply of water , the water which is lost thr
ough the
stomata is replaced by water from the xylem vessels
in the leaf. In fact, evaporation of water molecules from
the cells of a leaf creates a suction which pulls water
from the xylem cells of roots. The loss of water in the
form of vapour from the aerial parts of the plant is
known as transpiration.
Thus, transpiration helps in the absorption and
upward movement of water and minerals dissolved
in it from roots to the leaves. It also helps in
temperature regulation. The effect of root pressure in
transport of water is more important at night. During
the day when the stomata are open, the transpiration
pull becomes the major driving force in the movement
of water in the xylem.
Transport of food and other substances
So far we have discussed the transport of water and minerals in plants.
Now let us consider how the products of metabolic processes, particularly
photosynthesis, are moved from leaves, where they are formed, to other
parts of the plant. This transport of soluble products of photosynthesis
is called translocation and it occurs in the part of the vascular tissue
known as phloem. Besides the products of photosynthesis, the phloem
transports amino acids and other substances. These substances are
especially delivered to the storage organs of roots, fruits and seeds and
to growing organs. The translocation of food and other substances takes
place in the sieve tubes with the help of adjacent companion cells both
in upward and downward directions.
Unlike transport in xylem which can be largely explained by simple
physical forces, the translocation in phloem is achieved by utilising
Movement of water during transpiration in a tree
energy from ATP. This incr eases the osmotic pr essur e of the tissue
causing water to move into it. This pressure moves the material in the
phloem to tissues which have less pressure. This allows the phloem to
move material according to the plant’s needs. For example, in the spring,
sugar stored in root or stem tissue would be transported to the buds
which need energy to grow.
?. What are the components of the transport system in human beings?
What are the functions of these components?
. Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in
mammals and birds?
. What are the components of the transport system in highly organised
plants?
. How are water and minerals transported in plants?
. How is food transported in plants?
. . EX5. We have alr eady discussed how or ganisms get rid of gaseous wastes
generated during photosynthesis or respiration. Other metabolic activities
generate nitrogenous materials which need to be removed. The biological
process involved in the removal of these harmful metabolic wastes from
the body is called excretion. Different organisms use varied strategies to
do this. Many unicellular organisms remove these wastes by simple
diffusion from the body surface into the surrounding
water . As we have seen in other processes, complex
multi-cellular organisms use specialised organs to
perform the same function.
. Excretion in Human Beings
The excretory system of human beings includes a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a urinary
bladder and a urethra. Kidneys are located in the
abdomen, one on either side of the backbone. Urine
produced in the kidneys passes through the ureters
into the urinary bladder where it is stored until it is
released through the urethra.
How is urine produced? The purpose of making
urine is to filter out waste products from the blood.
Just as CO2 is removed from the blood in the lungs,
nitrogenous waste such as urea or uric acid are
removed from blood in the kidneys. It is then no
surprise that the basic filtration unit in the kidneys,
Excretory system in human beings
capillaries. Each capillary cluster in the kidney is
associated with the cup-shaped end of a coiled tube
called Bowman’s capsule that collects the filtrate
(Fig. .). Each kidney has large numbers of these
filtration units called nephr ons packed close together .
Some substances in the initial filtrate, such as glucose,
amino acids, salts and a major amount of water , are
selectively re-absorbed as the urine flows along the tube.
The amount of water re-absorbed depends on how much
excess water there is in the body, and on how much of
dissolved waste there is to be excreted. The urine forming
in each kidney eventually enters a long tube, the ur eter,
which connects the kidneys with the urinary bladder .
Urine is stored in the urinary bladder until the pressure
of the expanded bladder leads to the urge to pass it out
through the ur ethra. The bladder is muscular , so it is
under nervous control, as we have discussed elsewhere.
As a result, we can usually control the urge to urinate.
More to Know!Artificial kidney (Hemodialysis)
Kidneys are vital organs for survival. Several factors like infections, injury or restricted
blood flow to kidneys reduce the activity of kidneys. This leads to accumulation of
poisonous wastes in the body, which can even lead to death. In case of kidney
failure, an artificial kidney can be used. An artificial kidney is a device to remove
nitrogenous waste products from the blood through dialysis.
Artificial kidneys contain a number of tubes with a semi-permeable lining, suspended
in a tank filled with dialysing fluid.
This fluid has the same osmotic
pressure as blood, except that it is
devoid of nitrogenous wastes. The
patient’s blood is passed through
these tubes. During this passage,
the waste products from the blood
pass into dialysing fluid by diffusion.
The purified blood is pumped back
into the patient. This is similar to the
function of the kidney, but it is
different since there is no re-
absorption involved. Normally, in a
healthy adult, the initial filtrate in the
kidneys is about L daily.
However , the volume actually
excreted is only a litre or two a day,
because the remaining filtrate is re-
absorbed in the kidney tubules.
Structure of a nephron
Plants use completely different
strategies for excretion than those
of animals. Oxygen itself can be
thought of as a waste product
generated during photosynthesis!
We have discussed earlier how
plants deal with oxygen as well as
CO2. They can get rid of excess water
by transpiration. For other wastes,
plants use the fact that many of
their tissues consist of dead cells,
and that they can even lose some
parts such as leaves. Many plant
waste products are stored in
cellular vacuoles. W aste pr
oducts
may be stored in leaves that fall off.
Other waste products are stored as
resins and gums, especially in old
xylem. Plants also excrete some
waste substances into the soil
around them.
What y ou hav e learnt
Movement of various types can be taken as an indication of life.
Maintenance of life requires processes like nutrition, respiration, transport of
materials within the body and excretion of waste products.
Autotrophic nutrition involves the intake of simple inorganic materials from the
environment and using an external energy source like the Sun to synthesise complex
high-energy organic material.
Heterotrophic nutrition involves the intake of complex material prepared by other
organisms.
In human beings, the food eaten is broken down by various steps along the
alimentary canal and the digested food is absorbed in the small intestine to be sent
to all cells in the body.Think it over!
Organ donation
Organ donation is a generous act of donating an
organ to a person who suffers from non-function of
organ(s). Donation of an organ may be done by the
consent of the donor and his/her family. Anyone
regardless of age or gender can become an organ
and tissue donor . Organ transplants can save or
transfor m the life of a person. T ransplantation is
required because recipient’s organ has been
damaged or has failed by disease or injury. In organ
transplantation the organ is surgically removed
from one person (organ donor) and transplanted to
another person (the recipient). Common
transplantations include corneas, kidneys, heart,
liver, pancr eas, lungs, intestines and bone marr ow.
Most organ and tissue donations occur just after
the donor has died or when the doctor declares a
person brain dead. But some organs such as
kidney, part of a liver , lung, etc., and tissues can be
donated while the donor is alive.
?. Describe the structure and functioning of nephrons.
. What are the methods used by plants to get rid of excretory products?
. How is the amount of urine produced regulated?
down to pr ovide ener gy in the for m of A TP. ATP is used to pr
ovide ener gy for other
reactions in the cell.
Respiration may be aerobic or anaerobic. Aerobic respiration makes more energy
available to the organism.
In human beings, the transport of materials such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, food
and excretory products is a function of the circulatory system. The circulatory
system consists of the heart, blood and blood vessels.
In highly dif ferentiated plants, transport of water , minerals, food and other materials
is a function of the vascular tissue which consists of xylem and phloem.
In human beings, excretory products in the form of soluble nitrogen compounds
are removed by the nephrons in the kidneys.
Plants use a variety of techniques to get rid of waste material. For example, waste
material may be stored in the cell-vacuoles or as gum and resin, removed in the
falling leaves, or excreted into the surrounding soil.
EXERCISES
.The kidneys in human beings are a part of the system for
(a) nutrition. (c) excretion.
(b) respiration. (d) transportation.
.The xylem in plants are responsible for
(a) transport of water . (c) transport of amino acids.
(b) transport of food. (d) transport of oxygen.
.The autotrophic mode of nutrition requires
(a) carbon dioxide and water . (c) sunlight.
(b) chlorophyll. (d) all of the above.
.The breakdown of pyruvate to give carbon dioxide, water and energy takes place in
(a) cytoplasm. (c) chloroplast.
(b) mitochondria. (d) nucleus.
.How are fats digested in our bodies? Where does this process take place?
.What is the role of saliva in the digestion of food?
.What are the necessary conditions for autotrophic nutrition and what are its by-
products?
.What are the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration? Name some
organisms that use the anaerobic mode of respiration.
.How are the alveoli designed to maximise the exchange of gases?
.What would be the consequences of a deficiency of haemoglobin in our bodies?
.Describe double circulation of blood in human beings. Why is it necessary?
.What are the differences between the transport of materials in xylem and phloem?
.Compare the functioning of alveoli in the lungs and nephrons in the kidneys with
respect to their structure and functioning. Coordination6 CHAPTER
In the pr evious chapter , we looked at life pr ocesses involved in the
maintenance functions in living organisms. There, we had started with
a notion we all have, that if we see something moving, it is alive. Some of
these movements are in fact the result of growth, as in plants. A seed
germinates and grows, and we can see that the seedling moves over the
course of a few days, it pushes soil aside and comes out. But if its growth
were to be stopped, these movements would not happen. Some
movements, as in many animals and some plants, are not connected
with growth. A cat running, children playing on swings, buffaloes
chewing cud – these are not movements caused by growth.
Why do we associate such visible movements with life? A possible
answer is that we think of movement as a response to a change in the
environment of the organism. The cat may be running because it has
seen a mouse. Not only that, we also think of movement as an attempt
by living organisms to use changes in their environment to their
advantage. Plants grow out into the sunshine. Children try to get pleasure
and fun out of swinging. Buffaloes chew cud to help break up tough
food so as to be able to digest it better . When bright light is focussed on
our eyes or when we touch a hot object, we detect the change and respond
to it with movement in order to protect ourselves.
If we think a bit more about this, it becomes apparent that all this
movement, in response to the environment, is carefully controlled. Each
kind of a change in the environment evokes an appropriate movement
in response. When we want to talk to our friends in class, we whisper ,
rather than shouting loudly. Clearly, the movement to be made depends
on the event that is triggering it. Therefore, such controlled movement
must be connected to the recognition of various events in the
environment, followed by only the correct movement in response. In other
words, living organisms must use systems providing control and
coordination. In keeping with the general principles of body organisation
in multicellular organisms, specialised tissues are used to provide these
control and coordination activities.
.
.ANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEMANIMALS – NERVOUS SYSTEM
In animals, such control and coordination are provided by nervous and
muscular tissues, which we have studied in Class IX. Touching a hot
Control and Coordination 101object is an urgent and dangerous
situation for us. W e need to detect it,
and respond to it. How do we detect that
we are touching a hot object? All
information from our environment is
detected by the specialised tips of some
nerve cells. These receptors are usually
located in our sense organs, such as the
inner ear , the nose, the tongue, and so
on. So gustatory receptors will detect taste
while olfactory receptors will detect smell.
This information, acquired at the
end of the dendritic tip of a nerve cell
[Fig. . (a)], sets off a chemical reaction
that creates an electrical impulse. This
impulse travels from the dendrite to the
cell body, and then along the axon to its
end. At the end of the axon, the electrical
impulse sets off the release of some
chemicals. These chemicals cross the
gap, or synapse, and start a similar
electrical impulse in a dendrite of the next
neuron. This is a general scheme of how
nervous impulses travel in the body. A
similar synapse finally allows delivery of such impulses from neurons to
other cells, such as muscles cells or gland [Fig. . (b)].
It is thus no surprise that nervous tissue is made up of an organised
network of nerve cells or neurons, and is specialised for conducting
information via electrical impulses fr om one part of the body to another .
Look at Fig. . (a) and identify the parts of a neuron (i) where
information is acquired, (ii) through which information travels as an
electrical impulse, and (iii) where this impulse must be converted into a
chemical signal for onward transmi ssion.
Put some sugar in your mouth. How does it taste?
Block your nose by pressing it between your thumb and index
finger . Now eat sugar again. Is ther e any dif ference in its taste?
While eating lunch, block your nose in the same way and notice if
you can fully appreciate the taste of the food you are eating.
Is there a difference in how sugar and food taste if your nose is
blocked? If so, why might this be happening? Read and talk about
possible explanations for these kinds of differences. Do you come across
a similar situation when you have a cold?
junction(a)
(b)
‘Reflex’ is a word we use very commonly when we talk about some sudden
action in r esponse to something in the envir onment. W e say ‘I jumped
out of the way of the bus reflexly’, or ‘I pulled my hand back from the
flame reflexly’, or ‘I was so hungry my mouth started watering reflexly’.
What exactly do we mean? A common idea in all such examples is that
we do something without thinking about it, or without feeling in control
of our r eactions. Y et these ar e situations wher e we ar e responding with
some action to changes in our environment. How is control and
coordination achieved in such situations?
Let us consider this further . Take one of our examples. T
ouching a
flame is an urgent and dangerous situation for us, or in fact, for any
animal! How would we respond to this? One seemingly simple way is to
think consciously about the pain and the possibility of getting burnt,
and therefore move our hand. An important question then is, how long
will it take us to think all this? The answer depends on how we think. If
nerve impulses ar e sent ar ound the way we have talked about earlier ,
then thinking is also likely to involve the creation of such impulses.
Thinking is a complex activity, so it is bound to involve a complicated
interaction of many nerve impulses from many neurons.
If this is the case, it is no surprise that the thinking tissue in our
body consists of dense networks of intricately arranged neurons. It sits
in the forward end of the skull, and receives signals from all over the
body which it thinks about before responding to them. Obviously, in
order to receive these signals, this thinking part of the brain in the skull
must be connected to nerves coming from various parts of the body.
Similarly, if this part of the brain is to instruct muscles to move, nerves
must carry this signal back to different parts of the body. If all of this is
to be done when we touch a hot object, it may take enough time for us to
get burnt!
How does the design of the body solve this problem? Rather than
having to think about the sensation of heat, if the nerves that detect heat
were to be connected to the nerves that move muscles in a simpler way,
the process of detecting the signal or the input and responding to it by
an output action might be completed quickly. Such a connection is
commonly called a reflex arc (Fig. .). Where should such reflex arc
connections be made between the input nerve and the output nerve?
The best place, of course, would be at the point where they first meet
each other . Nerves fr om all over the body meet in a bundle in the spinal
cord on their way to the brain. Reflex arcs are formed in this spinal cord
itself, although the information input also goes on to reach the brain.
Of course, reflex arcs have evolved in animals because the thinking
process of the brain is not fast enough. In fact many animals have very
little or none of the complex neuron network needed for thinking. So it is
quite likely that reflex arcs have evolved as efficient ways of functioning
in the absence of true thought pr ocesses. However , even after complex
neuron networks have come into existence, reflex arcs continue to be
more efficient for quick responses.
Control and Coordination 103Can you now trace the sequence of events which occur when a bright
light is focussed on your eyes?
. Human Brain
Is reflex action the only function of the spinal cord? Obviously not, since
we know that we are thinking beings. Spinal cord is made up of nerves
which supply information to think about. Thinking involves more
complex mechanisms and neural connections. These are concentrated
in the brain, which is the main coordinating centre of the body. The
brain and spinal cord constitute the central nervous system (Fig. .).
They receive information from all parts of the body and integrate it.
We also think about our actions. W riting, talking, moving a chair ,
clapping at the end of a programme are examples of voluntary actions
which are based on deciding what to do next. So, the brain also has to
send messages to muscles. This is the second way in which the nervous
system communicates with the muscles. The communication between
the central nervous system and the other parts of the body is facilitated
by the peripheral nervous system consisting of cranial nerves arising
from the brain and spinal nerves arising from the spinal cord. The brain
thus allows us to think and take actions based on that thinking. As you
will expect, this is accomplished through a complex design, with different
parts of the brain responsible for integrating different inputs and outputs.
The brain has three such major parts or regions, namely the fore-brain,
mid-brain and hind-brain.
The fore-brain is the main thinking part of the brain. It has regions
which receive sensory impulses from various receptors. Separate areas
of the fore-brain are specialised for hearing, smell, sight and so on. There
are separate areas of association where this sensory information is
interpreted by putting it together with information from other receptors
as well as with information that is already stored in the brain. Based onpassed on to the motor areas which control the movement of voluntary
muscles, for example, our leg muscles. However , certain sensations ar e
distinct from seeing or hearing, for example, how do we know that we
have eaten enough? The sensation of feeling full is because of a centre
associated with hunger , which is in a separate part of the for e-brain.
Study the labelled diagram of the human brain. W e have seen that
the different parts have specific functions. Can we find out the function
of each part?
Let us look at the other use of the word ‘reflex’ that we have talked
about in the introduction. Our mouth waters when we see food we like
without our meaning to. Our hearts beat without our thinking about it.
In fact, we cannot control these actions easily by thinking about them
even if we wanted to. Do we have to think about or remember to breathe
or digest food? So, in between the simple reflex actions like change in
the size of the pupil, and the thought out actions such as moving a
chair , ther e is another set of muscle movements over which we do not
have any thinking control. Many of these involuntary actions are
controlled by the mid-brain and hind-brain. All these involuntary actions
including blood pressure, salivation and vomiting are controlled by the
medulla in the hind-brain.
Think about activities like walking in a straight line, riding a bicycle,
picking up a pencil. These are possible due to a part of the hind-brain
called the cerebellum. It is responsible for precision of voluntary actions
and maintaining the posture and balance of the body. Imagine what
would happen if each of these events failed to take place if we were not
thinking about it.
Control and Coordination . How are these Tissues protected?
A delicate organ like the brain, which is so important for a variety of
activities, needs to be carefully protected. For this, the body is designed
so that the brain sits inside a bony box. Inside the box, the brain is
contained in a fluid-filled balloon which provides further shock
absorption. If you run your hand down the middle of your back, you
will feel a hard, bumpy structure. This is the vertebral column or
backbone which protects the spinal cord.
. How does the Nervous Tissue cause Action?
So far , we have been talking about nervous tissue, and how it collects
information, sends it around the body, processes information, makes
decisions based on information, and conveys decisions to muscles for
action. In other words, when the action or movement is to be performed,
muscle tissue will do the final job. How do animal muscles move? When
a nerve impulse reaches the muscle, the muscle fibre must move. How
does a muscle cell move? The simplest notion of movement at the cellular
level is that muscle cells will move by changing their shape so that they
shorten. So the next question is, how do muscle cells change their shape?
The answer must lie in the chemistry of cellular components. Muscle
cells have special proteins that change both their shape and their
arrangement in the cell in response to nervous electrical impulses. When
this happens, new arrangements of these proteins give the muscle cells
a shorter form. Remember when we talked about muscle tissue in
Class IX, there were different kinds of muscles, such as voluntary muscles
and involuntary muscles. Based on what we have discussed so far , what
do you think the differences between these would be?
?. What is the difference between a reflex action and walking?
. What happens at the synapse between two neurons?
. Which part of the brain maintains posture and equilibrium of the body?
. How do we detect the smell of an agarbatti (incense stick)?
. What is the role of the brain in reflex action?
. COORDINA6. COORDINA6. COORDINA6. COORDINA6. COORDINA TION IN PLTION IN PLTION IN PLTION IN PLTION IN PL ANTSANTSANTS
ANTSANTS
Animals have a nervous system for controlling and coordinating the
activities of the body. But plants have neither a nervous system nor
muscles. So, how do they respond to stimuli? When we touch the leaves
of a chhui-mui (the ‘sensitive’ or ‘touch-me-not’ plant of the Mimosa
family), they begin to fold up and droop. When a seed germinates, the
root goes down, the stem comes up into the air . What happens? Firstly,
the leaves of the sensitive plant move very quickly in response to touch.
directional movement of a seedling is caused by growth. If it is prevented
from growing, it will not show any movement. So plants show two different
types of movement – one dependent on growth and the other independent
of growth.
. Immediate Response to Stimulus
Let us think about the first kind of movement, such as that of the sensitive
plant. Since no growth is involved, the plant must actually move its leaves
in response to touch. But there is no nervous tissue, nor any muscle
tissue. How does the plant detect the touch, and how do the leaves move
in response?
If we think about where exactly the plant is touched, and what part
of the plant actually moves, it is apparent that movement happens at a
point different from the point of touch. So, information that a touch has
occurred must be communicated. The plants also use electrical-chemical
means to convey this information from cell to cell, but unlike in animals,
there is no specialised tissue in plants for the conduction of information.
Finally, again as in animals, some cells must change shape in order for
movement to happen. Instead of the specialised proteins found in animal
muscle cells, plant cells change shape by changing the amount of water
in them, resulting in swelling or shrinking, and therefore in changing
shapes (Fig. .).
. Movement Due to Growth
Some plants like the pea plant climb up other plants or fences by means
of tendrils. These tendrils are sensitive to touch. When they come in
contact with any support, the part of the tendril in contact with the object
does not grow as rapidly as the part of the tendril away from the object.
This causes the tendril to circle around the object and thus cling to it.
More commonly, plants respond to stimuli slowly by growing in a
particular direction. Because this growth is directional, it appears as if
the plant is moving. Let us understand this type of movement with the
help of an example.
Control and Coordination 107Environmental triggers such as light, or gravity
will change the directions that plant parts grow in.
These directional, or tropic, movements can be either
towards the stimulus, or away from it. So, in two
different kinds of phototropic movement, shoots
respond by bending towards light while roots
respond by bending away from it. How does this help
the plant?
Plants show tropism in response to other stimuli as well. The roots
of a plant always grow downwards while the shoots usually grow
upwards and away from the earth. This upward and downward growth
of shoots and roots, respectively, in response to the pull of earth or gravity
is, obviously, geotropism (Fig. .). If ‘hydro’ means water and ‘chemo’
refers to chemicals, what would ‘hydrotropism’ and ‘chemotropism’
mean? Can we think of examples of these kinds of directional growth
movements? One example of chemotropism is the growth of pollen tubes
towards ovules, about which we will learn more when we examine the
reproductive processes of living organisms.
Let us now once again think about how information is communicated
in the bodies of multicellular organisms. The movement of the
sensitive plant in response to touch is very quick. The movement of
sunflowers in response to day or night, on the other hand, is quite slow.
Growth-r elated movement of plants will be even slower .
Even in animal bodies, there are carefully controlled directions to
growth. Our arms and fingers grow in certain directions, not haphazardly.
So controlled movements can be either slow or fast. If fast responses to
stimuli are to be made, information transfer must happen very quickly.
For this, the medium of transmission must be able to move rapidly.Fill a conical flask with water .
Cover the neck of the flask with a wire mesh.
Keep two or three freshly germinated bean
seeds on the wire mesh.
Take a cardboard box which is open from one
side.
Keep the flask in the box in such a manner
that the open side of the box faces light coming
from a window (Fig. .).
After two or three days, you will notice that
the shoots bend towards light and roots away
from light.
Now turn the flask so that the shoots are away
from light and the roots towards light. Leave it
undisturbed in this condition for a few days.
Have the old parts of the shoot and root
changed direction?
Are there differences in the direction of the new
growth?
What can we conclude from this activity?
Response of the plant to the direction of light
limitations to the use of electrical impulses. Firstly, they will reach only
those cells that are connected by nervous tissue, not each and every cell
in the animal body. Secondly, once an electrical impulse is generated in
a cell and transmitted, the cell will take some time to reset its mechanisms
before it can generate and transmit a new impulse. In other words, cells
cannot continually create and transmit electrical impulses. It is thus no
wonder that most multicellular organisms use another means of
communication between cells, namely, chemical communication.
If, instead of generating an electrical impulse, stimulated cells release
a chemical compound, this compound would diffuse all around the
original cell. If other cells around have the means to detect this compound
using special molecules on their surfaces, then they would be able to
recognise infor mation, and even transmit it. This will be slower , of course,
but it can potentially reach all cells of the body, regardless of nervous
connections, and it can be done steadily and persistently. These
compounds, or hormones used by multicellular organisms for control
and coordination show a great deal of diversity, as we would expect.
Different plant hormones help to coordinate growth, development and
responses to the environment. They are synthesised at places away from
where they act and simply diffuse to the area of action.
Let us take an example that we have worked with earlier [When growing plants detect light, a hormone called auxin, synthesised
at the shoot tip, helps the cells to gr ow longer . When light is coming fr om
one side of the plant, auxin diffuses towards the shady side of the shoot.
This concentration of auxin stimulates the cells to grow longer on the
side of the shoot which is away from light. Thus, the plant appears to
bend towards light.
Another example of plant hormones are gibberellins which, like
auxins, help in the growth of the stem. Cytokinins promote cell division,
and it is natural then that they are present in greater concentration in
areas of rapid cell division, such as in fruits and seeds. These are examples
of plant hormones that help in promoting growth. But plants also need
signals to stop growing. Abscisic acid is one example of a hormone which
inhibits growth. Its effects include wilting of leaves.
?. What are plant hormones?
. How is the movement of leaves of the sensitive plant different from the
movement of a shoot towards light?
. Give an example of a plant hormone that promotes growth.
. How do auxins promote the growth of a tendril around a support?
. Design an experiment to demonstrate hydrotropism.
Control and Coordination . HORMONES IN ANIMALS6. HORMONES IN ANIMALS6. HORMONES IN ANIMALS6. HORMONES IN ANIMALS6. HORMONES IN ANIMALS
How are such chemical, or hormonal, means of information transmission
used in animals? What do some animals, for instance squirrels,
experience when they are in a scary situation? Their bodies have to
prepare for either fighting or running away. Both are very complicated
activities that will use a great deal of energy in controlled ways. Many
different tissue types will be used and their activities integrated together
in these actions. However , the two alter nate activities, fighting or running,
are also quite different! So here is a situation in which some common
preparations can be usefully made in the body. These preparations
should ideally make it easier to do either activity in the near future. How
would this be achieved?
If the body design in the squirrel relied only on electrical impulses
via nerve cells, the range of tissues instructed to prepare for the coming
activity would be limited. On the other hand, if a chemical signal were to
be sent as well, it would reach all cells of the body and provide the wide-
ranging changes needed. This is done in many animals, including human
beings, using a hormone called adrenaline that is secreted from the
adrenal glands. Look at Fig. . to locate these glands.
Adrenaline is secreted directly into the blood and carried to different
parts of the body. The target organs or the specific tissues on which it
acts include the heart. As a r esult, the heart beats faster , resulting in
supply of more oxygen to our muscles. The blood to the digestive system
and skin is reduced due to contraction of muscles around small arteries
in these organs. This diverts the blood to our skeletal muscles. The
breathing rate also increases because of the contractions of the
diaphragm and the rib muscles. All these responses together enable the
animal body to be ready to deal with the situation. Such animal hormones
are part of the endocrine system which constitutes a second way of control
and coordination in our body.
Look at Fig. .
Identify the endocrine glands mentioned in the figure.
Some of these glands have been listed in Table . and discussed
in the text. Consult books in the library and discuss with your
teachers to find out about other glands.
Remember that plants have hormones that control their directional
growth. What functions do animal hormones perform? On the face of it,
we cannot imagine their r ole in dir ectional gr owth. W e have never seen
an animal gr owing mor e in one dir ection or the other , depending on
light or gravity! But if we think about it a bit more, it will become evident
that, even in animal bodies, growth happens in carefully controlled places.
Plants will grow leaves in many places on the plant body, for example.
But we do not grow fingers on our faces. The design of the body is carefully
maintained even during the growth of children.
in coordinated growth. We have all seen salt packets which say ‘iodised
salt’ or ‘enriched with iodine’. Why is it important for us to have iodised
salt in our diet? Iodine is necessary for the thyroid gland to make
thyroxin hormone. Thyroxin regulates carbohydrate, protein and fat
metabolism in the body so as to provide the best balance for growth.
Iodine is essential for the synthesis of thyroxin. In case iodine is deficient
in our diet, there is a possibility that we might suffer from goitre. One
of the symptoms in this disease is a swollen neck. Can you correlate
this with the position of the thyroid gland in Fig. .?
Sometimes we come across people who are either very short (dwarfs)
or extremely tall (giants). Have you ever wondered how this happens?
Growth hormone is one of the hormones secreted by the pituitary. As
its name indicates, growth hormone regulates growth and development
of the body. If there is a deficiency of this hormone in childhood, it
leads to dwarfism.
You must have noticed many dramatic changes in your appearance
as well as that of your friends as you approached – years of age.
These changes associated with puberty are because of the secretion of
testosterone in males and oestrogen in females.
Do you know anyone in your family or friends who has been advised
by the doctor to take less sugar in their diet because they are suffering
from diabetes? As a treatment, they might be taking injections of insulin.
This is a hormone which is produced by the pancreas and helps in
regulating blood sugar levels. If it is not secreted in proper amounts,
the sugar level in the blood rises causing many harmful effects.Do You Know?
Hypothalamus plays
an important role in
the release of many
hormones. For
example, when the
level of growth
hormone is low, the
hypothalamus
releases growth
hormone releasing
factor which
stimulates the
pituitary gland to
release growth
hormone.
Control and Coordination 111If it is so important that hormones should be secreted in precise
quantities, we need a mechanism through which this is done. The timing
and amount of hormone released are regulated by feedback mechanisms.
For example, if the sugar levels in blood rise, they are detected by the
cells of the pancreas which respond by producing more insulin. As the
blood sugar level falls, insulin secretion is reduced.
Table . : Some important hormones and their functionsHormones are secreted by endocrine glands and have specific functions. Complete
Table . based on the hormone, the endocrine gland or the functions provided.
. How does chemical coordination take place in animals?
. Why is the use of iodised salt advisable?
. How does our body respond when adrenaline is secreted into the blood?
. Why are some patients of diabetes treated by giving injections of insulin?
What y ou hav e learnt?
Control and coordination are the functions of the nervous system and hormones
in our bodies.
The responses of the nervous system can be classified as reflex action, voluntary
action or involuntary action.
The nervous system uses electrical impulses to transmit messages.
The nervous system gets information from our sense organs and acts through our
muscles.
Chemical coordination is seen in both plants and animals.
Hormones produced in one part of an organism move to another part to achieve
the desired effect.
A feedback mechanism regulates the action of the hormones.S.No. Hormone Endocrine Gland Functions
. Growth hormone Pituitary gland Stimulates growth in all organs
. Thyroid gland Regulates metabolism for body growth
. Insulin Regulates blood sugar level
. Testosterone Testes
. Ovaries Development of female sex organs,
regulates menstrual cycle, etc.
. Adrenaline Adrenal gland
. Releasing Stimulates pituitary gland to release
hormones hormones
.Which of the following is a plant hormone?
(a) Insulin
(b) Thyroxin
(c)Oestrogen
(d) Cytokinin.
.The gap between two neurons is called a
(a)dendrite.
(b) synapse.
(c)axon.
(d) impulse.
.The brain is responsible for
(a) thinking.
(b) regulating the heart beat.
(c)balancing the body.
(d) all of the above.
.What is the function of receptors in our body? Think of situations where receptors
do not work properly. What problems are likely to arise?
.Draw the structure of a neuron and explain its function.
.How does phototropism occur in plants?
.Which signals will get disrupted in case of a spinal cord injury?
.How does chemical coordination occur in plants?
.What is the need for a system of control and coordination in an organism?
.How are involuntary actions and reflex actions different from each other?
.Compare and contrast nervous and hormonal mechanisms for control and
coordination in animals.
.What is the difference between the manner in which movement takes place in a
sensitive plant and the movement in our legs? How do Organisms
Reproduce ? CHAPTER
Before we discuss the mechanisms by which organisms reproduce,
let us ask a more basic question – why do organisms reproduce?
After all, reproduction is not necessary to maintain the life of an individual
organism, unlike the essential life processes such as nutrition,
respiration, or excretion. On the other hand, if an individual organism is
going to create more individuals, a lot of its energy will be spent in the
process. So why should an individual organism waste energy on a process
it does not need to stay alive? It would be interesting to discuss the
possible answers in the classroom!
Whatever the answer to this question, it is obvious that we notice
organisms because they reproduce. If there were to be only one, non-
reproducing member of a particular kind, it is doubtful that we would
have noticed its existence. It is the large numbers of organisms belonging
to a single species that bring them to our notice. How do we know that
two different individual organisms belong to the same species? Usually,
we say this because they look similar to each other . Thus, r eproducing
organisms create new individuals that look very much like themselves.
. DO ORG7. DO ORG7. DO ORG7. DO ORG7. DO ORG ANISMS CREAANISMS CREAANISMS CREAANISMS CREAANISMS CREA TE EXATE EXATE EXA
TE EXATE EXA CT COPIES OFCT COPIES OFCT COPIES OFCT COPIES OFCT COPIES OF
THEMSEL THEMSELTHEMSEL THEMSELTHEMSEL VES? VES?VES? VES?VES?
Organisms look similar because their body designs are similar . If body
designs are to be similar , the blueprints for these designs should be
similar . Thus, repr oduction at its most basic level will involve making
copies of the blueprints of body design. In Class IX, we learnt that the
chromosomes in the nucleus of a cell contain information for inheritance
of features from parents to next generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid) molecules. The DNA in the cell nucleus is the information
source for making proteins. If the information is changed, different
proteins will be made. Different proteins will eventually lead to altered
body designs.
Therefore, a basic event in reproduction is the creation of a DNA
copy. Cells use chemical reactions to build copies of their DNA. This
creates two copies of the DNA in a reproducing cell, and they will need to
be separated fr om each other . However , keeping one copy of DNA in the
original cell and simply pushing the other one out would not work,
structure for maintaining life processes. Therefore, DNA copying is
accompanied by the creation of an additional cellular apparatus, and
then the DNA copies separate, each with its own cellular apparatus.
Effectively, a cell divides to give rise to two cells.
These two cells ar e of course similar , but ar e they likely to be
absolutely identical? The answer to this question will depend on how
accurately the copying r eactions involved occur . No bio-chemical r eaction
is absolutely reliable. Therefore, it is only to be expected that the process
of copying the DNA will have some variations each time. As a result, the
DNA copies generated will be similar , but may not be identical to the
original. Some of these variations might be so drastic that the new DNA
copy cannot work with the cellular apparatus it inherits. Such a newborn
cell will simply die. On the other hand, there could still be many other
variations in the DNA copies that would not lead to such a drastic
outcome. Thus, the surviving cells are similar to, but subtly different
from each other . This inbuilt tendency for variation during r eproduction
is the basis for evolution, as we will discuss in the next chapter .
. The Impor tance of V ariation
Populations of organisms fill well-defined places, or niches, in the
ecosystem, using their ability to reproduce. The consistency of DNA
copying during reproduction is important for the maintenance of body
design features that allow the organism to use that particular niche.
Reproduction is therefore linked to the stability of populations of species.
However , niches can change because of r easons beyond the contr ol
of the organisms. Temperatures on earth can go up or down, water levels
can vary, or there could be meteorite hits, to think of a few examples. If
a population of reproducing organisms were suited to a particular niche
and if the niche were drastically altered, the population could be wiped
out. However , if some variations wer e to be pr esent in a few individuals
in these populations, there would be some chance for them to survive.
Thus, if there were a population of bacteria living in temperate waters,
and if the water temperature were to be increased by global warming,
most of these bacteria would die, but the few variants resistant to heat
would survive and gr ow further . Variation is thus useful for the survival
of species over time.
. What is the importance of DNA copying in reproduction?
. Why is variation beneficial to the species but not necessarily
for the individual?
How do Organisms Reproduce?
ORGANISMSORGANISMSORGANISMSORGANISMSORGANISMS
Dissolve about gm of sugar in mL of water .
Take mL of this solution in a test tube and add a pinch of yeast
granules to it.
Put a cotton plug on the mouth of the test tube and keep it in a
warm place.
After or hours, put a small drop of yeast culture from the test
tube on a slide and cover it with a coverslip.
Observe the slide under a microscope.
Wet a slice of br ead, and keep it in a cool, moist and dark place.
Observe the surface of the slice with a magnifying glass.
Record your observations for a week.
Compare and contrast the ways in which yeast grows in the first
case, and how mould grows in the second.
Having discussed the context in which reproductive processes work,
let us now examine how different organisms actually reproduce. The
modes by which various organisms reproduce depend on the body
design of the organisms.
. Fission
For unicellular organisms, cell division, or fission, leads to the creation
of new individuals. Many different patterns of fission have been observed.
Many bacteria and protozoa simply split into two equal halves during
cell division. In organisms such as Amoeba , the splitting of the two cells
during division can take place in any plane.
Observe a permanent slide of
Amoeba under a microscope.
Similarly observe another
permanent slide of Amoeba
showing binary fission.
Now, compare the observations of
both the slides.
However , some unicellular or ganisms
show somewhat more organisation of their
bodies, such as is seen in Leishmania (which
cause kala-azar ), which have a whip-like
structure at one end of the cell. In such
organisms, binary fission occurs in a definite orientation in relation to(b)
parasite, Plasmodium , divide into many daughter cells simultaneously
by multiple fission.
Yeast, on the other hand, can put out small buds that separate and
grow further , as we saw in . Fragmentation
Multiple fission in
Plasmodium Collect water from a lake or pond that appears dark green and
contains filamentous structures.
Put one or two filaments on a slide.
Put a drop of glycerine on these filaments and cover it with a coverslip.
Observe the slide under a microscope.
Can you identify different tissues in the Spirogyra filaments?
In multi-cellular organisms with relatively simple body organisation,
simple reproductive methods can still work. Spirogyra , for example,
simply breaks up into smaller pieces upon maturation. These pieces or
fragments grow into new individuals. Can we work out the reason for
this, based on what we saw in This is not true for all multi-cellular organisms. They cannot simply
divide cell-by-cell. The reason is that many multi-cellular organisms, as
we have seen, are not simply a random collection of cells. Specialised
cells are organised as tissues, and tissues are organised into organs,
which then have to be placed at definite positions in the body. In such a
carefully organised situation, cell-by-cell division would be impractical.
Multi-cellular organisms, therefore, need to use more complex ways of
reproduction.
A basic strategy used in multi-cellular organisms is that different
cell types perform different specialised functions. Following this general
pattern, reproduction in such organisms is also the function of a specific
cell type. How is reproduction to be achieved from a single cell type, if
the organism itself consists of many cell types? The answer is that there
must be a single cell type in the organism that is capable of growing,
proliferating and making other cell types under the right circumstances.
. Regeneration
Many fully differentiated organisms have the ability to give rise to new
individual organisms from their body parts. That is, if the individual is
somehow cut or broken up into many pieces, many of these pieces grow
into separate individuals. For example, simple animals like Hydra and
Planaria can be cut into any number of pieces and each piece grows
into a complete organism. This is known as regeneration (see Fig. .).
Regeneration is carried out by specialised cells. These cells proliferate
and make large numbers of cells. From this mass of cells, different cells
undergo changes to become various cell types and tissues. These changes
How do Organisms Reproduce?
sequence referred to as
development. However ,
regeneration is not the same
as reproduction, since most
organisms would not
normally depend on being cut
up to be able to reproduce.
. Budding
Organisms such as Hydra
use regenerative cells for
reproduction in the process of
budding. In Hydra , a bud
develops as an outgrowth due
to repeated cell division at one
specific site (Fig. .). These buds develop into tiny individuals and when
fully mature, detach from the parent body and become new independent
individuals.
. V egetative Propagation
There are many plants in which parts like the root, stem and leaves
develop into new plants under appropriate conditions. Unlike in most
animals, plants can indeed use such a mode for reproduction. This
property of vegetative propagation is used in methods such as layering
or grafting to grow many plants like sugarcane, roses, or grapes for
agricultural purposes. Plants raised by vegetative propagation can bear
flowers and fruits earlier than those produced from seeds. Such methods
also make possible the propagation of plants such as banana, orange,
rose and jasmine that have lost the capacity to produce seeds. Another
advantage of vegetative propagation is that all plants produced are
genetically similar enough to the parent plant to have all its
characteristics.
margin of Bryophyllum fall on the soil and develop into
new plants (Fig. .).
Select a money-plant.
Cut some pieces such that they contain at least
one leaf.
Cut out some other portions between two leaves.
Dip one end of all the pieces in water and observe
over the next few days.
Which ones grow and give rise to fresh leaves?
What can you conclude from your observations?
Tissue cultur e
In tissue culture, new plants are grown by removing tissue or separating cells from
the growing tip of a plant. The cells are then placed in an artificial medium where they
divide rapidly to form a small group of cells or callus. The callus is transferred to
another medium containing hormones for growth and differentiation. The plantlets
are then placed in the soil so that they can grow into mature plants. Using tissue
culture, many plants can be grown from one parent in disease-free conditions. This
technique is commonly used for ornamental plants.
. Spore F ormation
Even in many simple multi-cellular organisms, specific reproductive
parts can be identified. The thread-like structures that developed on
the bread in (Rhizopus ). They are not reproductive parts. On the other hand, the
tiny blob-on-a-stick structures are involved in reproduction. The
blobs are sporangia, which contain cells, or spores, that can
eventually develop into new Rhizopus individuals (Fig. .). The spores
are covered by thick walls that protect them until they come into
contact with another moist surface and can begin to grow.Spore formation in RhizopusTake a potato and observe its surface. Can notches be seen?
Cut the potato into small pieces such that some pieces contain a
notch or bud and some do not.
Spread some cotton on a tray and wet it. Place the potato pieces
on this cotton. Note where the pieces with the buds are placed.
Observe changes taking place in these potato pieces over the next
few days. Make sure that the cotton is kept moistened.
Which are the potato pieces that give rise to fresh green shoots
and roots?
Leaf of Bryophyllum
with buds
More to Know?
How do Organisms Reproduce? 119All the modes of reproduction that we have discussed so far allow
new generations to be created from a single individual. This is known as
asexual reproduction.
?. How does binary fission differ from multiple fission?
. How will an organism be benefited if it reproduces through spores?
. Can you think of reasons why more complex organisms cannot give
rise to new individuals through regeneration?
. Why is vegetative propagation practised for growing some types of
plants?
. Why is DNA copying an essential part of the process of reproduction?
. SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7. SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7. SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7. SEXUAL REPRODUCTION7. SEXUAL REPRODUCTION
We are also familiar with modes of r eproduction that depend on the
involvement of two individuals before a new generation can be created.
Bulls alone cannot produce new calves, nor can hens alone produce
new chicks. In such cases, both sexes, males and females, are needed to
produce new generations. What is the significance of this sexual mode
of reproduction? Are there any limitations of the asexual mode of
reproduction, which we have been discussing above?
. Why the Sexual Mode of Reproduction?
The creation of two new cells from one involves copying of the DNA as
well as of the cellular apparatus. The DNA copying mechanism, as we
have noted, cannot be absolutely accurate, and the resultant errors are
a source of variations in populations of organisms. Every individual
organism cannot be protected by variations, but in a population,
variations are useful for ensuring the survival of the species. It would
therefore make sense if organisms came up with reproductive modes
that allowed more and more variation to be generated.
While DNA-copying mechanisms are not absolutely accurate, they
are precise enough to make the generation of variation a fairly slow
process. If the DNA copying mechanisms were to be less accurate, many
of the resultant DNA copies would not be able to work with the cellular
apparatus, and would die. So how can the process of making variants
be speeded up? Each new variation is made in a DNA copy that already
has variations accumulated from previous generations. Thus, two
different individuals in a population would have quite different patterns
of accumulated variations. Since all of these variations are in living
individuals, it is assured that they do not have any really bad effects.
Combining variations from two or more individuals would thus create
new combinations of variants. Each combination would be novel, since
it would involve two different individuals. The sexual mode of
different individuals during reproduction.
But this creates a major difficulty. If each new generation is to be the
combination of the DNA copies from two pre-existing individuals, then
each new generation will end up having twice the amount of DNA that
the previous generation had. This is likely to mess up the control of the
cellular apparatus by the DNA. How many ways can we think of for
solving this difficulty?
We have seen earlier that as or ganisms become mor
e complex, the
specialisation of tissue increases. One solution that many multi-cellular
organisms have found for the problem mentioned above is to have special
lineages of cells in specialised organs in which only half the number of
chromosomes and half the amount of DNA as compared to the non-
reproductive body cells. This is achieved by a process of cell division
called meiosis. Thus, when these germ-cells from two individuals combine
during sexual reproduction to form a new individual, it results in re-
establishment of the number of chromosomes and the DNA content in
the new generation.
If the zygote is to grow and develop into an organism which has
highly specialised tissues and organs, then it has to have sufficient stores
of energy for doing this. In very simple organisms, it is seen that the two
germ-cells ar e not very dif ferent fr om one another , or may even be similar .
But as the body designs become more complex, the germ-cells also
specialise. One germ-cell is large and contains the food-stores while the
other is smaller and likely to be motile. Conventionally, the motile germ-
cell is called the male gamete and the germ-cell containing the stored
food is called the female gamete. W e shall see in the next few sections
how the need to create these two different types of gametes give rise to
differences in the male and female reproductive organs and, in some
cases, differences in the bodies of the male and female organisms.
. Sexual Reproduction in Flowering Plants
The r eproductive parts of angiosper ms ar e located in the flower . You
have already studied the different parts of a flower – sepals, petals,
stamens and pistil. Stamens and pistil are
the reproductive parts of a flower which
contain the germ-cells. What possible
functions could the petals and sepals serve?
The flower may be unisexual (papaya,
watermelon) when it contains either stamens
or pistil or bisexual ( Hibiscus , mustard)
when it contains both stamens and pistil.
Stamen is the male reproductive part and it
produces pollen grains that are yellowish
in colour . You must have seen this yellowish
powder that often sticks to our hands if we
touch the stamen of a flower . Pistil is pr esent
in the centre of a flower and is the female
reproductive part. It is made of three parts.
Longitudinal section of
flower
How do Organisms Reproduce?
Germination of pollen on
stigmaThe swollen bottom part is the ovary, middle elongated part is the style
and the terminal part which may be sticky is the stigma. The ovary
contains ovules and each ovule has an egg cell. The male germ-cell
produced by pollen grain fuses with the female gamete present in
the ovule. This fusion of the germ-cells or fertilisation gives us the
zygote which is capable of growing into a new plant.
Thus the pollen needs to be transferred from the stamen to the
stigma. If this transfer of pollen occurs in the same flower , it is
referred to as self-pollination. On the other hand, if the pollen is
transferr ed fr om one flower to another , it is known as cr oss-
pollination. This transfer of pollen from one flower to another is
achieved by agents like wind, water or animals.
After the pollen lands on a suitable stigma, it has to reach the
female germ-cells which are in the ovary. For this, a tube grows
out of the pollen grain and travels through the style to reach the
ovary.
After fertilisation, the zygote divides several times to form an
embryo within the ovule. The ovule develops a tough coat and is
gradually converted into a seed. The ovary grows rapidly and ripens
to form a fruit. Meanwhile, the petals, sepals, stamens, style and
stigma may shrivel and fall off. Have you ever observed any flower
part still persisting in the fruit? T ry and work out the advantages
of seed-formation for the plant. The seed contains the future plant
or embryo which develops into a seedling under appropriate
conditions. This process is known as germination.
Soak a few seeds of Bengal gram ( chana )
and keep them overnight.
Drain the excess water and cover the seeds
with a wet cloth and leave them for a day.
Make sure that the seeds do not become dry.
Cut open the seeds carefully and observe
the different parts.
Compare your observations with the Fig. .
and see if you can identify all the parts.
. Reproduction in Human Beings
So far , we have been discussing the variety of modes that dif ferent species
use for reproduction. Let us now look at the species that we are most
interested in, namely, humans. Humans use a sexual mode of
reproduction. How does this process work?
Let us begin at an apparently unrelated point. All of us know that
our bodies change as we become older . You have lear nt changes that
take place in your body earlier in Class VIII also. W e notice that our
height has incr eased continuously fr
om early age till now. W e acquir e
teeth, we even lose the old, so-called milk teeth and acquire new ones.
Germination
of growth, in which the body becomes lar ger. But in early teenage years,
a whole new set of changes occurs that cannot be explained simply as
body enlargement. Instead, the appearance of the body changes.
Proportions change, new featur es appear , and so do new sensations.
Some of these changes ar e common to both boys and girls. W e begin
to notice thick hair growing in new parts of the body such as armpits
and the genital area between the thighs, which can also become darker
in colour . Thinner hair can also appear on legs and ar ms, as well as on
the face. The skin frequently becomes oily and we might begin to develop
pimples. W e begin to be conscious and awar e of both our own bodies
and those of others in new ways.
On the other hand, there are also changes taking place that are
different between boys and girls. In girls, breast size begins to increase,
with darkening of the skin of the nipples at the tips of the breasts. Also,
girls begin to menstruate at around this time. Boys begin to have new
thick hair gr owth on the face and their voices begin to crack. Further ,
the penis occasionally begins to become enlarged and erect, either in
daydreams or at night.
All of these changes take place slowly, over a period of months and
years. They do not happen all at the same time in one person, nor do
they happen at an exact age. In some people, they happen early and
quickly, while in others, they can happen slowly. Also, each change does
not become complete quickly either . So, for example, thick hair on the
face in boys appears as a few scattered hairs first, and only slowly does
the growth begin to become uniform. Even so, all these changes show
differences between people. Just as we have differently shaped noses or
fingers, so also we have different patterns of hair growth, or size and
shape of breast or penis. All of these changes are aspects of the sexual
maturation of the body.
Why does the body show sexual maturation at this age? W e have
talked about the need for specialised cell types in multi-cellular bodies
to carry out specialised functions. The creation of germ-cells to participate
in sexual reproduction is another specialised function, and we have seen
that plants develop special cell and tissue types to create them. Human
beings also develop special tissues for this purpose. However , while the
body of the individual organism is growing to its adult size, the resources
of the body are mainly directed at achieving this growth. While that is
happening, the maturation of the reproductive tissue is not likely to be
a major priority. Thus, as the rate of general body growth begins to slow
down, reproductive tissues begin to mature. This period during
adolescence is called puberty.
So how do all the changes that we have talked about link to the
reproductive pr ocess? W e must r emember that the sexual mode of
reproduction means that germ-cells from two individuals have to join
together . This can happen by the exter nal release of ger m-cells fr om the
bodies of individuals, as happens in flowering plants. Or it can happen
by two individuals joining their bodies together for internal transfer of
germ-cells for fusion, as happens in many animals. If animals are to
How do Organisms Reproduce? 123participate in this process of mating, their state of sexual maturity must
be identifiable by other individuals. Many changes during puberty, such
as new hair -growth patter ns, ar e signals that sexual maturation is taking
place.
On the other hand, the actual transfer of germ-cells between two
people needs special organs for the sexual act, such as the penis when it
is capable of becoming erect. In mammals such as humans, the baby is
carried in the mother’s body for a long period, and will be breast-fed
later. The female r eproductive or gans and br easts will need to matur e to
accommodate these possibilities. Let us look at the systems involved in
the process of sexual reproduction.
. (a) Male Reproductive System
The male reproductive system (Fig. .)
consists of portions which produce the
germ-cells and other portions that deliver
the germ-cells to the site of fertilisation.
The formation of germ-cells or sperms
takes place in the testes. These are located
outside the abdominal cavity in scrotum
because sperm formation requires a lower
temperature than the normal body
temperatur e. We have discussed the r ole of the
testes in the secretion of the hormone,
testoster one, in the pr evious chapter . In
addition to regulating the formation of sperms,
testosterone brings about changes in
appearance seen in boys at the time of puberty.
The sperms formed are delivered
through the vas deferens which unites with
a tube coming fr om the urinary bladder . The
urethra thus forms a common passage for
both the sperms and urine. Along the path
of the vas deferens, glands like the prostate
and the seminal vesicles add their secretions
so that the sperms are now in a fluid which
makes their transport easier and this fluid
also provides nutrition. The sperms are tiny
bodies that consist of mainly genetic
material and a long tail that helps them to
move towards the female germ-cell.
. (b) Female Reproductive System
The female germ-cells or eggs are made in
the ovaries. They are also responsible for the
production of some hormones. Look at
Fig. . and identify the various organs in
the female reproductive system.
immature eggs. On reaching puberty, some of these start maturing. One
egg is produced every month by one of the ovaries. The egg is carried
from the ovary to the womb through a thin oviduct or fallopian tube.
The two oviducts unite into an elastic bag-like structure known as the
uterus. The uterus opens into the vagina through the cervix.
The sperms enter through the vaginal passage during sexual
intercourse. They travel upwards and reach the oviduct where they may
encounter the egg. The fertilised egg (zygote) starts dividing and form a
ball of cells or embryo. The embryo i s implanted in the li ning of the uterus
where they continue to gr ow and develop or gans to become foetus. W e
have seen in earlier sections that the mother’s body is designed to
undertake the development of the child. Hence the uterus prepares itself
every month to receive and nurture the growing embryo. The lining
thickens and is richly supplied with blood to nourish the growing embryo.
The embryo gets nutrition from the mother’s blood with the help of a
special tissue called placenta. This is a disc which is embedded in the
uterine wall. It contains villi on the embryo’s side of the tissue. On the
mother’s side are blood spaces, which surround the villi. This provides
a large surface area for glucose and oxygen to pass from the mother to
the embryo. The developing embryo will also generate waste substances
which can be removed by transferring them into the mother’s blood
through the placenta. The development of the child inside the mother’s
body takes approximately nine months. The child is born as a result of
rhythmic contractions of the muscles in the uterus.
. (c) What happens when the Egg is not F ertilised?
If the egg is not fertilised, it lives for about one day. Since the ovary
releases one egg every month, the uterus also prepares itself every month
to receive a fertilised egg. Thus its lining becomes thick and spongy.
This would be required for nourishing the embryo if fertilisation had
taken place. Now, however , this lining is not needed any longer . So, the
lining slowly breaks and comes out through the vagina as blood and
mucous. This cycle takes place roughly every month and is known as
menstruation. It usually lasts for about two to eight days.
. (d) Reproductive Health
As we have seen, the process of sexual maturation is gradual, and takes
place while general body growth is still going on. Therefore, some degree
of sexual maturation does not necessarily mean that the body or the
mind is ready for sexual acts or for having and bringing up children.
How do we decide if the body or the mind is ready for this major
responsibility? All of us are under many different kinds of pressures
about these issues. There can be pressure from our friends for
participating in many activities, whether we really want to or not. There
can be pressure from families to get married and start having children.
There can be pressure from government agencies to avoid having
children. In this situation, making choices can become very difficult.
How do Organisms Reproduce? 125We must also consider the possible health consequences of having
sex. W e have discussed in Class IX that diseases can be transmitted
from person to person in a variety of ways. Since the sexual act is a
very intimate connection of bodies, it is not surprising that many
diseases can be sexually transmitted. These include bacterial infections
such as gonorrhoea and syphilis, and viral infections such as warts
and HIV-AIDS. Is it possible to prevent the transmission of such diseases
during the sexual act? Using a covering, called a condom, for the penis
during sex helps to prevent transmission of many of these infections to
some extent.
The sexual act always has the potential to lead to pregnancy.
Pregnancy will make major demands on the body and the mind of the
woman, and if she is not ready for it, her health will be adversely
affected. Therefore, many ways have been devised to avoid pregnancy.
These contraceptive methods fall in a number of categories. One
category is the creation of a mechanical barrier so that sperm does not
reach the egg. Condoms on the penis or similar coverings worn in the
vagina can serve this purpose. Another category of contraceptives acts
by changing the hormonal balance of the body so that eggs are not
released and fertilisation cannot occur . These drugs commonly need
to be taken orally as pills. However , since they change hor monal
balances, they can cause side -effects too. Other contraceptive devices
such as the loop or the copper -T are placed in the uterus to pr event
pregnancy. Again, they can cause side effects due to irritation of the
uterus. If the vas deferens in the male is blocked, sperm transfer will
be prevented. If the fallopian tube in the female is blocked, the egg will
not be able to reach the uterus. In both cases fertilisation will not take
place. Surgical methods can be used to create such blocks. While
surgical methods are safe in the long run, surgery itself can cause
infections and other problems if not performed properly. Surgery can
also be used for removal of unwanted pregnancies. These may be
misused by people who do not want a particular child, as happens in
illegal sex-selective abortion of female foetuses. For a healthy society,
the female-male sex ratio must be maintained. Because of reckless
female foeticides, child sex ratio is declining at an alarming rate in
some sections of our society, although prenatal sex determination has
been prohibited by law.
We have noted earlier that r eproduction is the pr
ocess by which
organisms increase their populations. The rates of birth and death in a
given population will determine its size. The size of the human population
is a cause for concern for many people. This is because an expanding
population makes it harder to improve everybody’s standard of living.
However , if inequality in society is the main r eason for poor standar ds of
living for many people, the size of the population is relatively unimportant.
If we look around us, what can we identify as the most important
reason(s) for poor living standards?
Reproduction, unlike other life processes, is not essential to maintain the life of an
individual organism.
Reproduction involves creation of a DNA copy and additional cellular apparatus
by the cell involved in the process.
Various or ganisms use dif ferent modes of r eproduction depending on their body
design.
In fission, many bacteria and protozoa simply divide into two or more daughter
cells.
Organisms such as hydra can regenerate if they are broken into pieces. They can
also give out buds which mature into new individuals.
Roots, stems and leaves of some plants develop into new plants through vegetative
propagation.
These are examples of asexual reproduction where new generations are created
from a single individual.
Sexual reproduction involves two individuals for the creation of a new individual.
DNA copying mechanisms creates variations which are useful for ensuring the
survival of the species. Modes of sexual reproduction allow for greater variation to
be generated.
Reproduction in flowering plants involves transfer of pollen grains from the anther
to the stigma which is referred to as pollination. This is followed by fertilisation.
Changes in the body at puberty, such as increase in breast size in girls and new
facial hair growth in boys, are signs of sexual maturation.
The male reproductive system in human beings consists of testes which produce
sperms, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, urethra and penis.
The female reproductive system in human beings consists of ovaries, fallopian
tubes, uterus and vagina.
Sexual reproduction in human beings involves the introduction of sperm in the
vagina of the female. Fertilisation occurs in the fallopian tube.
Contraception to avoid pregnancy can be achieved by the use of condoms, oral
pills, copper -T and other methods.?. How is the process of pollination different from fertilisation?
. What is the role of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland?
. What are the changes seen in girls at the time of puberty?
. How does the embryo get nourishment inside the mother’s body?
. If a woman is using a copper -T, will it help in pr otecting her fr om
sexually transmitted diseases?
How do Organisms Reproduce? 127EXERCISES
.Asexual reproduction takes place through budding in
(a)Amoeba.
(b)Yeast.
(c)Plasmodium.
(d) Leishmania.
.Which of the following is not a part of the female reproductive system in human
beings?
(a) Ovary
(b) Uterus
(c) Vas defer ens
(d) Fallopian tube
.The anther contains
(a) sepals.
(b) ovules.
(c) pistil.
(d) pollen grains.
.What are the advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction?
.What are the functions performed by the testis in human beings?
.Why does menstruation occur?
.Draw a labelled diagram of the longitudinal section of a flower .
.What are the different methods of contraception?
.How are the modes for reproduction different in unicellular and
multicellular organisms?
.How does reproduction help in providing stability to populations of species?
.What could be the reasons for adopting contraceptive methods? Creation of diversity over succeeding
generations. The original organism at the top
will give rise to, say, two individuals, similar
in body design, but with subtle differences.
Each of them, in turn, will give rise to two
individuals in the next generation. Each of
the four individuals in the bottom row will
be dif fer
ent fr om each other . While some of
these differences will be unique, others will
be inherited from their respective parents,
who wer e different fr om each other .Heredity8 CHAPTER
We have seen that r eproductive pr ocesses give rise to new individuals
that ar e similar , but subtly dif ferent. W e have discussed how some
amount of variation is produced even during asexual reproduction. And
the number of successful variations are maximised by the process of
sexual reproduction. If we observe a field of sugarcane we find very little
variations among the individual plants. But in a number of animals
including human beings, which reproduce sexually, quite distinct
variations are visible among dif ferent individuals. In this chapter , we
shall be studying the mechanism by which variations are created and
inherited.
. .AAAAACCUMUL CCUMULCCUMUL CCUMULCCUMUL A AA AATION OF VTION OF VTION OF VTION OF VTION OF V ARIA ARIAARIA ARIAARIA TION TIONTION TIONTION
DURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTIONDURING REPRODUCTION
Inheritance from the previous generation provides
both a common basic body design, and subtle
changes in it, for the next generation. Now think
about what would happen when this new generation,
in its turn, reproduces. The second generation will
have differences that they inherit from the first
generation, as well as newly created differences
(Fig. .).
single individual reproduces, as happens in asexual
reproduction. If one bacterium divides, and then the
resultant two bacteria divide again, the four
individual bacteria generated would be very similar .
There would be only very minor differences between
them, generated due to small inaccuracies in DNA
copying. However , if sexual r eproduction is involved,
even greater diversity will be generated, as we will
see when we discuss the rules of inheritance.
Do all these variations in a species have equal
chances of surviving in the environment in which they
find themselves? Obviously not. Depending on the
nature of variations, different individuals would have
Heredity . HEREDITY8. HEREDITY8. HEREDITY8. HEREDITY8. HEREDITY
The most obvious outcome of the reproductive process still remains the
generation of individuals of similar design. The rules of heredity determine
the process by which traits and characteristics are reliably inherited. Let
us take a closer look at these rules.
. Inherited T raits
What exactly do we mean by similarities and dif ferences? W e know that
a child bears all the basic featur es of a human being. However , it does
not look exactly like its parents, and human populations show a great
deal of variation.?. If a trait A exists in % of a population of an asexually reproducing
species and a trait B exists in % of the same population, which trait
is likely to have arisen earlier?
. How does the creation of variations in a species promote survival?
Observe the ears of all the students in the class. Prepare a list of
students having free or attached earlobes and calculate the
percentage of students having each (Fig. .). Find out about the
earlobes of the parents of each student in the class. Correlate the
earlobe type of each student with that of their parents. Based on
this evidence, suggest a possible rule for the inheritance of earlobe
types.
. Rules for the Inheritance of T raits – –– ––
Mendel’s Contributions
The rules for inheritance of such traits in human beings are related to
the fact that both the father and the mother contribute practically equal
amounts of genetic material to the child. This means that each trait can
be influenced by both paternal and maternal DNA. Thus, for each trait
there will be two versions in each child. What will, then, the trait seen in
the child be? Mendel (see box) worked out the main rules of such
inheritance, and it is interesting to look at some of his experiments from
more than a century ago.(a) Free and (b) attached
earlobes. The lowest part
of the ear , called the
earlobe, is closely attached
to the side of the head in
some of us, and not
in others. Free and
attached earlobes are two
variants found in human
populations.different kinds of advantages. Bacteria that can withstand heat will survive
better in a heat wave, as we have discussed earlier . Selection of variants
by environmental factors forms the basis for evolutionary processes, as
we will discuss in later sections.
(a)
(b)
peas – round/wrinkled seeds, tall/short plants, white/violet flowers and
so on. He took pea plants with different characteristics – a tall plant and
a short plant, produced progeny by crossing them, and calculated the
percentages of tall or short progeny.
In the first place, there were no halfway characteristics in this first-
generation, or F1 progeny – no ‘medium-height’ plants. All plants were
tall. This meant that only one of the parental traits
was seen, not some mixture of the two. So the next
question was, were the tall plants in the F1
generation exactly the same as the tall plants of the
parent generation? Mendelian experiments test this
by getting both the parental plants and these F1 tall
plants to reproduce by self-pollination. The progeny
of the par ental plants ar e, of course, all tall. However ,
the second-generation, or F2, progeny of the F1 tall
plants are not all tall. Instead, one quarter of them
are short. This indicates that both the tallness and
shortness traits were inherited in the F1 plants, but
only the tallness trait was expressed. This led Mendel
to propose that two copies of factor (now called genes)
controlling traits are present in sexually reproducing
organism. These two may be identical, or may be
different, depending on the parentage. A pattern of
inheritance can be worked out with this assumption,
as shown in Fig. .Gregor Johann Mendel (–)
Mendel was educated in a monastery and went on to study science and
mathematics at the University of Vienna. Failure in the examinations for a
teaching certificate did not suppress his zeal for scientific quest. He went
back to his monastery and started growing peas. Many others had studied
the inheritance of traits in peas and other or
ganisms earlier , but Mendel
blended his knowledge of science and mathematics and was the first one
to keep count of individuals exhibiting a particular trait in each generation.
This helped him to arrive at the laws of inheritance.
Inheritance of traits
over two generations In Fig. ., what experiment would we do to confirm that the F2
generation did in fact have a :: ratio of TT, Tt and tt trait
combinations?
In this explanation, both TT and Tt are tall plants, while only tt is a
short plant. In other words, a single copy of ‘T’ is enough to make the
plant tall, while both copies have to be ‘t’ for the plant to be short. T raits
like ‘T’ are called dominant traits, while those that behave like ‘t’ are
called r ecessive traits. W ork out which trait would be consider ed
dominant and which one recessive in Fig. .
Heredity
x
RR yy
(round, green)rr YY
(wrinkled, yellow)
Ry
rY
Rr Yy
(round, yellow)F1
x
Rr Yy
F1Rr Yy
F1
round, yellow
round, green
wrinkled, yellow
wrinkled, green
seeds16
separate traits, shape and colour of seeds
RY Ry rY ry
RY
Ry
rY
ryRRYY RRYy RrYY RrYy
RRYy RRyy RrYy Rryy
RrYY RrYy rrYY rrYy
RrYy Rryy rrYy rryyF2
Independent inheritance
of two separate traits,
shape and colour of seedsWhat happens when pea plants showing two different
characteristics, rather than just one, are bred with each other?
What do the progeny of a tall plant with round seeds and a short
plant with wrinkled-seeds look like? They are all tall and have
round seeds. Tallness and round seeds are thus dominant traits.
But what happens when these F1 progeny are used to generate
F2 progeny by self-pollination? A Mendelian experiment will find
that some F2 progeny are tall plants with round seeds, and some
were short plants with wrinkled seeds. However , ther e would also
be some F2 progeny that showed new combinations. Some of them
would be tall, but have wrinkled seeds, while others would be short,
but have r ound seeds. Y ou can see as to how new combinations of
traits are formed in F2 offspring when factors controlling for seed
shape and seed colour recombine to form zygote leading to form
F2 offspring (Fig. .). Thus, the tall/short trait and the round
seed/wrinkled seed trait are independently inherited.
. How do these T raits get Expressed?
How does the mechanism of heredity work? Cellular DNA is
the information source for making proteins in the cell. A section
of DNA that provides information for one protein is called the
gene for that protein. How do proteins control the
characteristics that we are discussing here? Let us take the
example of tallness as a characteristic. W e know that plants
have hormones that can trigger growth. Plant height can thus
depend on the amount of a particular plant hormone. The
amount of the plant hormone made will depend on the
efficiency of the process for making it. Consider now an enzyme
that is important for this process. If this enzyme works
efficiently, a lot of hormone will be made, and the plant will be
tall. If the gene for that enzyme has an alteration that makes
the enzyme less efficient, the amount of hormone will be less,
and the plant will be short. Thus, genes control characteristics,
or traits.
If the interpretations of Mendelian experiments we have been
discussing are correct, then both parents must be contributing
equally to the DNA of the progeny during sexual reproduction.
We have disscussed this issue in the pr evious Chapter . If both
parents can help determine the trait in the progeny, both parents
must be contributing a copy of the same gene. This means that
each pea plant must have two sets of all genes, one inherited from
each parent. For this mechanism to work, each germ cell must
have only one gene set.
How do germ-cells make a single set of genes from the normal two
copies that all other cells in the body have? If progeny plants inherited a
single whole gene set from each parent, then the experiment explained
in Fig. . cannot work. This is because the two characteristics ‘R’ and
‘y’ would then be linked to each other and cannot be independentlyas a single long thread of DNA, but as separate independent pieces,
each called a chromosome. Thus, each cell will have two copies of each
chromosome, one each from the male and female parents. Every germ-
cell will take one chromosome from each pair and these may be of either
maternal or paternal origin. When two germ cells combine, they will
restore the normal number of chromosomes in the progeny, ensuring
the stability of the DNA of the species. Such a mechanism of inheritance
explains the results of the Mendel experiments, and is used by all
sexually reproducing organisms. But asexually reproducing organisms
also follow similar rules of inheritance. Can we work out how their
inheritance might work?
. Se x Deter mination
We have discussed the idea that the two sexes participating in sexual
reproduction must be somewhat different from each other for a number
of reasons. How is the sex of a newborn individual
determined? Different species use very different strategies
for this. Some rely entirely on environmental cues. Thus,
in some animals like a few reptiles, the temperature at
which fertilised eggs are kept determines whether the
animals developing in the eggs will be male or female. In
other animals, such as snails, individuals can change sex,
indicating that sex is not genetically deter mined. However ,
in human beings, the sex of the individual is largely
genetically determined. In other words, the genes inherited
from our parents decide whether we will be boys or girls.
But so far , we have assumed that similar gene sets ar
e
inherited from both parents. If that is the case, how can
genetic inheritance determine sex?
The explanation lies in the fact that all human
chromosomes are not paired. Most human chromosomes
have a maternal and a paternal copy, and we have
such pairs. But one pair , called the sex chr omosomes, is
odd in not always being a per fect pair . Women have a
perfect pair of sex chromosomes, both called X. But men
have a mismatched pair in which one is a normal-sized X
while the other is a short one called Y . So women ar e XX,
while men ar e XY. Now, can we work out what the
inheritance pattern of X and Y will be?
As Fig. . shows, half the children will be boys and
half will be girls. All children will inherit an X chromosome
from their mother regardless of whether they are boys or
girls. Thus, the sex of the children will be determined by
what they inherit from their father . A child who inherits
an X chromosome from her father will be a girl, and one
who inherits a Y chromosome from him will be a boy.Sex determination in
human beings
Heredity 133QUESTIONS
?. How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits may be dominant or
recessive?
. How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits are inherited
independently?
. A man with blood group A marries a woman with blood group O and
their daughter has blood group O. Is this information enough to tell you
which of the traits – blood group A or O – is dominant? Why or why not?
. How is the sex of the child determined in human beings?
What y ou hav e learnt
Variations arising during the pr ocess of r eproduction can be inherited.
These variations may lead to increased survival of the individuals.
Sexually reproducing individuals have two copies of genes for the same trait. If the
copies are not identical, the trait that gets expressed is called the dominant trait
and the other is called the recessive trait.
Traits in one individual may be inherited separately, giving rise to new combinations
of traits in the offspring of sexual reproduction.
Sex is determined by different factors in various species. In human beings, the
sex of the child depends on whether the paternal chromosome is X (for girls) or Y
(for boys).
EXERCISES
.A Mendelian experiment consisted of breeding tall pea plants bearing violet flowers
with short pea plants bearing white flowers. The progeny all bore violet flowers,
but almost half of them were short. This suggests that the genetic make-up of the
tall parent can be depicted as
(a) TTWW
(b) TTww
(c) TtWW
(d) TtWw
.A study found that children with light-coloured eyes are likely to have parents
with light-coloured eyes. On this basis, can we say anything about whether the
light eye colour trait is dominant or recessive? Why or why not?
.Outline a project which aims to find the dominant coat colour in dogs.
.How is the equal genetic contribution of male and female parents ensured in
the progeny? Refraction9 CHAPTER
We see a variety of objects in the world ar ound us. However , we ar e
unable to see anything in a dark room. On lighting up the room,
things become visible. What makes things visible? During the day, the
sunlight helps us to see objects. An object reflects light that falls on it.
This reflected light, when received by our eyes, enables us to see things.
We are able to see thr ough a transpar ent medium as light is transmitted
through it. There are a number of common wonderful phenomena
associated with light such as image formation by mirrors, the twinkling
of stars, the beautiful colours of a rainbow, bending of light by a medium
and so on. A study of the properties of light helps us to explore them.
By observing the common optical phenomena around us, we may
conclude that light seems to travel in straight lines. The fact that a small
source of light casts a sharp shadow of an opaque object points to this
straight-line path of light, usually indicated as a ray of light.More to Know!If an opaque object on the path of light becomes very small , light has a tendency to
bend around it and not walk in a straight line – an effect known as the diffraction of
light. Then the straight-line treatment of optics using rays fails. To explain phenomena
such as diffraction, light is thought of as a wave, the details of which you will study
in higher classes. Again, at the beginning of the 20th century, it became known that
the wave theory of light often becomes inadequate for treatment of the interaction of
light with matter , and light often behaves somewhat like a str eam of particles . This
confusion about the true nature of light continued for some years till a modern
quantum theory of light emerged in which light is neither a ‘wave’ nor a ‘particle’ –
the new theory reconciles the particle properties of light with the wave nature.
In this Chapter , we shall study the phenomena of r eflection and
refraction of light using the straight-line propagation of light. These basic
concepts will help us in the study of some of the optical phenomena in
natur e. We shall try to understand in this Chapter the r eflection of light
by spherical mirrors and refraction of light and their application in real
life situations.
. REFLECTION OF LIGHT9. REFLECTION OF LIGHT9. REFLECTION OF LIGHT9. REFLECTION OF LIGHT9. REFLECTION OF LIGHT
A highly polished sur face, such as a mirr or, reflects most of the light
falling on it. Y ou ar e already familiar with the laws of r eflection of light.
Light – Reflection and Refraction 135Let us recall these laws –
(i)The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection, and
(ii)The incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidence
and the reflected ray, all lie in the same plane.
These laws of reflection are applicable to all types of reflecting surfaces
including spherical sur faces. Y ou are familiar with the for mation of image
by a plane mirr or. What ar e the pr operties of the image? Image for med
by a plane mirror is always virtual and erect. The size of the image is
equal to that of the object. The image formed is as far behind the mirror
as the object is in fr ont of it. Further , the image is laterally inverted.
How would the images be when the reflecting surfaces are curved? Let
us explore.
Take a large shining spoon. Try to view your face in its curved
surface.
Do you get the image? Is it smaller or larger?
Move the spoon slowly away from your face. Observe the image.
How does it change?
Reverse the spoon and repeat the look like now?
Compare the characteristics of the image on the two surfaces.
The curved surface of a shining spoon could be considered as a curved
mirror. The most commonly used type of curved mirr or is the spherical
mirror. The r eflecting sur face of such mirr ors can be consider ed to for m
a part of the surface of a sphere. Such mirrors, whose reflecting surfaces
are spherical, ar e called spherical mirr ors. W e shall now study about
spherical mirrors in some detail.
. SPHERIC9. SPHERIC9. SPHERIC9. SPHERIC9. SPHERIC AL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORSAL MIRRORS
The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror may be curved inwards or
outwar ds. A spherical mirr or, whose r eflecting sur face is curved inwar ds,
that is, faces towar ds the centr e of the spher e, is called a concave mirr or.
A spherical mirror whose reflecting surface is curved outwards, is called
a convex mirr or. The schematic r epresentation of these mirr ors is shown
in Fig. . Y ou may note in these diagrams that the back
of the mirror is shaded.
You may now understand that the sur face of the spoon
curved inwards can be approximated to a concave mirror
and the surface of the spoon bulged outwards can be
approximated to a convex mirr or.
Before we move further on spherical mirrors, we need to
recognise and understand the meaning of a few terms. These
terms are commonly used in discussions about spherical
mirrors. The centre of the reflecting surface of a spherical
mirror is a point called the pole. It lies on the surface of the
mirror. The pole is usually r epresented by the letter P .Schematic representation of spherical
mirrors; the shaded side is non-reflecting.(a) Concave mirror (b) Convex mirror
This sphere has a centre. This point is called the centre of curvature of
the spherical mirr or. It is r epresented by the letter C. Please note that the
centr e of curvatur e is not a part of the mirr or. It lies outside its r eflecting
surface. The centre of curvature of a concave mirror lies in front of it.
However , it lies behind the mirr or in case of a convex mirr or. You may
note this in Fig. (a) and (b). The radius of the sphere of which the
reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part, is called the radius
of curvatur e of the mirr or. It is r epresented by the letter R. You may note
that the distance PC is equal to the radius of curvature. Imagine a straight
line passing through the pole and the centre of curvature of a spherical
mirror. This line is called the principal axis. Remember that principal
axis is normal to the mirror at its pole. Let us understand an important
term related to mirrors, through an CAUTION : Do not look at the Sun directly or even into a mirror
reflecting sunlight. It may damage your eyes.
Hold a concave mirror in your hand and direct its reflecting surface
towards the Sun.
Direct the light reflected by the mirror on to a sheet of paper held
close to the mirr or.
Move the sheet of paper back and forth gradually until you find
on the paper sheet a bright, sharp spot of light.
Hold the mirror and the paper in the same position for a few
minutes. What do you observe? Why?
The paper at first begins to burn producing smoke. Eventually it
may even catch fire. Why does it burn? The light from the Sun is converged
at a point, as a sharp, bright spot by the mirr or. In fact, this spot of light
is the image of the Sun on the sheet of paper . This point is
the focus of the concave mirr or. The heat pr oduced due to
the concentration of sunlight ignites the paper . The distance
of this image from the position of the mirror gives the
approximate value of focal length of the mirr or.
Let us try to understand this observation with the help
of a ray diagram.
Observe Fig. (a) closely. A number of rays parallel
to the principal axis are falling on a concave mirr or. Observe
the reflected rays. They are all meeting/intersecting at a
point on the principal axis of the mirr or. This point is called
the principal focus of the concave mirr or. Similarly, observe
Fig. . (b). How are the rays parallel to the principal axis,
reflected by a convex mirror? The reflected rays appear to
come from a point on the principal axis. This point is called
the principal focus of the convex mirr or. The principal focus
is represented by the letter F . The distance between the
pole and the principal focus of a spherical mirror is called
the focal length. It is represented by the letter f.(a) Concave mirror
(b) Convex mirror(b)(a)
Light – Reflection and Refraction 137The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror is by-and-large spherical.
The surface, then, has a circular outline. The diameter of the reflecting
surface of spherical mirror is called its aperture. In Fig., distance MN
represents the apertur e. We shall consider in our discussion only such
spherical mirrors whose aperture is much smaller than its radius of
curvature.
Is there a relationship between the radius of curvature R, and focal
length f, of a spherical mirror? For spherical mirrors of small apertures,
the radius of curvatur e is found to be equal to twice the focal length. W e
put this as R = 2f . This implies that the principal focus of a spherical
mirror lies midway between the pole and centre of curvature.
. Image F ormation by Spherical Mir rors
You have studied about the image for mation by plane mirr ors. Y ou also
know the nature, position and relative size of the images formed by them.
How about the images formed by spherical mirrors? How can we locate
the image formed by a concave mirror for different positions of the object?
Are the images real or virtual? Are they enlarged, diminished or have
the same size? W e shall explor e this with an You have alr eady lear nt a way of deter mining the focal length of a
concave mirr or. In spot of light you got on the paper is, in fact, the image of the Sun. It
was a tiny, r eal, inverted image. Y ou got the appr oximate focal length
of the concave mirror by measuring the distance of the image from
the mirr or.
Take a concave mirr or. Find out its appr oximate focal length in
the way described above. Note down the value of focal length. (Y ou
can also find it out by obtaining image of a distant object on a
sheet of paper .)
Mark a line on a Table with a chalk. Place the concave mirror on
a stand. Place the stand over the line such that its pole lies over
the line.
Draw with a chalk two more lines parallel to the previous line
such that the distance between any two successive lines is equal
to the focal length of the mirr or. These lines will now corr espond
to the positions of the points P , F and C, r espectively. Remember –
For a spherical mirror of small aperture, the principal focus F lies
mid-way between the pole P and the centre of curvature C.
Keep a bright object, say a burning candle, at a position far beyond
C. Place a paper screen and move it in front of the mirror till you
obtain a sharp bright image of the candle flame on it.
Observe the image carefully. Note down its nature, position and
relative size with respect to the object size.
Repeat the activity by placing the candle – (a) just beyond C,
(b) at C, (c) between F and C, (d) at F , and (e) between P and F .
In one of the cases, you may not get the image on the screen.
Identify the position of the object in such a case. Then, look for its
virtual image in the mirror itself.
Note down and tabulate your observations.
the image formed by a concave mirror depends on the position of the
object in r elation to points P , F and C. The image for med is r eal for some
positions of the object. It is found to be a virtual image for a certain other
position. The image is either magnified, reduced or has the same size,
depending on the position of the object. A summary of these observations
is given for your reference in Table .
Table . Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the object
Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the
object image image image
At infinity At the focus F Highly diminished, Real and inverted
point-sized
Beyond C Between F and C Diminished Real and inverted
At C At C Same size Real and inverted
Between C and F Beyond C Enlarged Real and inverted
At F At infinity Highly enlarged Real and inverted
Between P and F Behind the mirror Enlarged Virtual and erect
. Representation of Images F ormed by Spherical
Mirrors Using Ray Diagrams
We can also study the for mation of images by spherical mirrors by
drawing ray diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed
in front of a spherical mirr or. Each small portion of the extended object
acts like a point source. An infinite number of rays originate from each
of these points. To construct the ray diagrams, in order to locate the
image of an object, an arbitrarily large number of rays emanating from a
point could be consider ed. However , it is mor e convenient to consider
only two rays, for the sake of clarity of the ray diagram. These rays are
so chosen that it is easy to know their directions after reflection from the
mirror.
The intersection of at least two reflected rays give the position of image
of the point object. Any two of the following rays can be considered for
locating the image.
(i)A ray parallel to the principal
axis, after reflection, will pass
through the principal focus
in case of a concave mirror
or appear to diverge from
the principal focus in
case of a convex mirr or.
This is illustrated in Fig.
(a) and (b).(a) (b)
. .
Light – Reflection and Refraction (ii)A ray passing through the
principal focus of a concave
mirror or a ray which is
directed towards the
principal focus of a convex
mirror, after reflection, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is
illustrated in Fig. (a)
and (b).
(iii) A ray passing through the
centre of curvature of a
concave mirror or directed
in the direction of the centre
of curvature of a convex
mirror, after r eflection, is
reflected back along the
same path. This is
illustrated in Fig. (a) and
(b). The light rays come back
along the same path
because the incident rays
fall on the mirror along the
normal to the reflecting
surface.
(iv)A ray incident obliquely to
the principal axis , towards
a point P (pole of the mirror),
on the concave mirror
[Fig. . (a)] or a convex
mirror [Fig. . (b)], is
reflected obliquely. The
incident and reflected rays
follow the laws of reflection
at the point of incidence
(point P), making equal
angles with the principal axis.(a) (b)
Remember that in all the above cases the laws of reflection are followed.
At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that
the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
(a)Image formation by Concave Mirror
by a concave mirror for various positions of the object.(b) (a)
(a) (b)
Draw neat ray diagrams for each position of the object shown in
Table .
You may take any two of the rays mentioned in the pr evious section
for locating the image.
Compare your diagram with those given in Fig. .
Describe the nature, position and relative size of the image formed
in each case.
Tabulate the results in a convenient format.
Uses of concave mirrors
Concave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights and
vehicles headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are
often used as shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The
dentists use concave mirrors to see large images of the teeth of patients.
Large concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce
heat in solar furnaces.
(b)Image formation by a Convex Mirror
We studied the image for mation by a concave mirr or. Now we shall
study the for mation of image by a convex mirr or.
Light – Reflection and Refraction 141We consider two positions of the object for studying the image for med
by a convex mirr or. First is when the object is at infinity and the second
position is when the object is at a finite distance fr om the mirr or. The ray
diagrams for the formation of image by a convex mirror for these two
positions of the object are shown in Fig. (a) and (b), respectively. The
results are summarised in Table .Take a convex mirr or. Hold it in one hand.
Hold a pencil in the upright position in the other hand.
Observe the image of the pencil in the mirr or. Is the image er ect or
inverted? Is it diminished or enlarged?
Move the pencil away from the mirror slowly. Does the image
become smaller or larger?
Repeat this closer to or farther away from the focus as the object is moved
away from the mirror?
You have so far studied the image for mation by a plane mirr or, a
concave mirr or and a convex mirr or. Which of these mirr ors will give the
full image of a large object? Let us explore through an Observe the image of a distant object, say a distant tree, in a
plane mirr or.
Could you see a full-length image?Table . Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex mirror
Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the
object image image image
At infinity At the focus F , Highly diminished, Virtual and erect
behind the mirror point-sized
Between infinity Between P and F , Diminished Virtual and erect
and the pole P of behind the mirror
the mirror
object in the image?
Repeat this full length image of the object?
Now try using a convex mirr or. Did you succeed? Explain your
observations with reason.
You can see a full-length image of a tall building/tr ee in a small
convex mirr or. One such mirr or is fitted in a wall of Agra Fort facing T aj
Mahal. If you visit the Agra Fort, try to observe the full image of Taj
Mahal. To view distinctly, you should stand suitably at the terrace
adjoining the wall.
Uses of convex mirrors
Convex mirr ors ar e commonly used as r ear-view (wing) mirr ors in
vehicles. These mirrors are fitted on the sides of the vehicle, enabling the
driver to see traffic behind him/her to facilitate safe driving. Convex
mirrors are preferred because they always give an erect, though
diminished, image. Also, they have a wider field of view as they are curved
outwards. Thus, convex mirrors enable the driver to view much larger
area than would be possible with a plane mirr or.
?. Define the principal focus of a concave mirr or.
. The radius of curvature of a spherical mirror is cm. What is its focal
length?
. Name a mirror that can give an erect and enlarged image of an object.
. Why do we pr efer a convex mirr or as a r ear-view mirr or in vehicles?
. Sign Convention for Reflection by Spherical Mirrors
While dealing with the reflection of light by spherical mirrors, we shall
follow a set of sign conventions called the New Cartesian Sign
Convention . In this convention, the pole (P) of the mirror is taken as the
origin (Fig. .). The principal axis of the mirror is taken as the x-axis
(X’X) of the coordinate system. The conventions are as follows –
(i)The object is always placed to the left of the mirr or. This implies
that the light from the object falls on the mirror from the left-hand
side.
(ii)All distances parallel to the principal axis are measured from the
pole of the mirr or.
(iii) All the distances measured to the right of the origin (along
+ x-axis) are taken as positive while those measured to the left of
the origin (along – x-axis) are taken as negative.
(iv) Distances measured perpendicular to and above the principal axis
(along + y-axis) are taken as positive.
(v)Distances measured perpendicular to and below the principal axis
(along –y-axis) are taken as negative.
Light – Reflection and Refraction 143The New Cartesian Sign Convention described above is illustrated in
Fig. for your reference. These sign conventions are applied to obtain
the mirror formula and solve related numerical problems.
. Mir ror Formula and Magnification
In a spherical mirror , the distance of the
object from its pole is called the object
distance ( u). The distance of the image from
the pole of the mirror is called the image
distance ( v). You alr eady know that the
distance of the principal focus from the pole
is called the focal length ( f). There is a
relationship between these three quantities
given by the mirr or for mula which is
expressed as v u f+ = (.)
This formula is valid in all situations for all
spherical mirrors for all positions of the
object. Y ou must use the New Cartesian Sign
Convention while substituting numerical
values for u, v, f , and R in the mirror formula
for solving problems.
Magnification
Magnification produced by a spherical mirror gives the relative extent to
which the image of an object is magnified with respect to the object size.
It is expressed as the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the
object. It is usually represented by the letter m.
If h is the height of the object and h ′ is the height of the image, then
the magnification m produced by a spherical mirror is given by
m = Height of the image ( )
Height of the object ( )′h
h
m = ′h
h(.)
The magnification m is also related to the object distance ( u) and
image distance ( v). It can be expressed as:
Magnification ( m) = ′= −h
hv
u(.)
You may note that the height of the object is taken to be positive as
the object is usually placed above the principal axis. The height of the
image should be taken as positive for virtual images. However , it is to be
taken as negative for real images. A negative sign in the value of the
magnification indicates that the image is real. A positive sign in the value
of the magnification indicates that the image is virtual.The New Cartesian Sign Convention for spherical mirrors
A convex mirr or used for r ear-view on an automobile has a radius of
curvatur e of . m. If a bus is located at . m from this mirr or,
find the position, nature and size of the image.
Solution
Radius of curvature, R=+ . m;
Object-distance, u=– . m;
Image-distance, v=?
Height of the image, h′=?
Focal length, f = R/ = + . m
= + . m (as the principal focus of
a convex mirror is behind the mirror)
Since + =v u f
or,
v f u= − = +
. –
( .)− =
.+
.
= . .
.+
v = .
.+ = + . m
The image is . m at the back of the mirror .
Magnification, m = 'h v
h u= − = – . m
. m−
= + .
The image is virtual, erect and smaller in size by a factor of .
Example .
An object, . cm in size, is placed at . cm in front of a concave
mirror of focal length . cm. At what distance from the mirror
should a screen be placed in order to obtain a sharp image? Find
the nature and the size of the image.
Solution
Object-size, h = + . cm;
Object-distance, u = – . cm;
Focal length, f = –. cm;
Image-distance, v = ?
Image-size, h′ = ?
From Eq. (.): v u f+ =
or,
v f u= − =
. . . .− = − +− −
Light – Reflection and Refraction 145or, . . .
. . v− + −= = or, v = – . cm
The scr een should be placed at . cm in fr ont of the mirror . The
image is real.
Also, magnification, m = 'h v
h u= −
or, h′ = –v h
u = (cm) (cm)
( . cm)− +−−
Height of the image, h ′ = – . cm
The image is inverted and enlarged.
?. Find the focal length of a convex mirror whose radius of curvature is
cm.
. A concave mirror produces three times magnified (enlarged) real image
of an object placed at cm in front of it. Where is the image located?
. REFRACTION OF LIGHT9. REFRACTION OF LIGHT9. REFRACTION OF LIGHT9. REFRACTION OF LIGHT9. REFRACTION OF LIGHT
Light seems to travel along straight-line paths in a transparent medium.
What happens when light enters from one transparent medium to
another? Does it still move along a straight-line path or change its
direction? W e shall r ecall some of our day-to-day experiences.
You might have observed that the bottom of a tank or a pond
containing water appears to be raised. Similarly, when a thick glass slab
is placed over some printed matter , the letters appear raised when viewed
through the glass slab. Why does it happen? Have you seen a pencil
partly immersed in water in a glass tumbler? It appears to be displaced
at the inter face of air and water . You might have observed that a lemon
kept in water in a glass tumbler appears to be bigger than its actual
size, when viewed from the sides. How can you account for such
experiences?
Let us consider the case of the apparent displacement of a pencil,
partly immersed in water . The light r eaching you fr om the portion of the
pencil inside water seems to come from a different direction, compared
to the part above water . This makes the pencil appear to be displaced at
the interface. For similar reasons, the letters appear to be raised, when
seen through a glass slab placed over it.
Does a pencil appear to be displaced to the same extent, if instead of
water , we use liquids like kerosene or turpentine? W ill the letters appear
to rise to the same height if we replace a glass slab with a transparent
plastic slab? Y ou will find that the extent of the ef fect is dif ferent for
different pair of media. These observations indicate that light does not
obliquely from one medium to another , the dir ection of pr opagation of
light in the second medium changes. This phenomenon is known as
refraction of light. Let us understand this phenomenon further by doing
a few activities .
Place a coin at the bottom of a bucket filled with water .
With your eye to a side above water , try to pick up the coin in one
go. Did you succeed in picking up the coin?
Repeat the Ask your friends to do this. Compare your experience with theirs.
Place a large shallow bowl on a Table and put a coin in it.
Move away slowly from the bowl. Stop when the coin just
disappears from your sight.
Ask a friend to pour water gently into the bowl without disturbing
the coin.
Keep looking for the coin from your position. Does the coin becomes
visible again from your position? How could this happen?
The coin becomes visible again on pouring water into the bowl. The
coin appears slightly raised above its actual position due to refraction of
light.
Draw a thick straight line in ink, over a sheet of white paper placed
on a Table.
Place a glass slab over the line in such a way that one of its edges
makes an angle with the line.
Look at the portion of the line under the slab from the sides. What
do you observe? Does the line under the glass slab appear to be
bent at the edges?
Next, place the glass slab such that it is normal to the line. What
do you observe now? Does the part of the line under the glass slab
appear bent?
Look at the line from the top of the glass slab. Does the part of the
line, beneath the slab, appear to be raised? Why does this happen?
. Refraction through a Rectangular Glass Slab
To understand the phenomenon of refraction of light through a glass
slab, let us do an
Light – Reflection and Refraction 147In this at points O and O ′. Note that both the points O and O ′ lie on surfaces
separating two transparent media. Draw a perpendicular NN’ to AB at O
and another perpendicular MM ′ to CD at O ′. The light ray at point O has
entered from a rarer medium to a denser medium, that is, from air to
glass. Note that the light ray has bent towards
the normal. At O ′, the light ray has entered
from glass to air , that is, fr om a denser
medium to a rarer medium. The light here
has bent away from the normal. Compare the
angle of incidence with the angle of refraction
at both refracting surfaces AB and CD.
In Fig. ., a ray EO is obliquely
incident on surface AB, called incident ray.
OO′ is the refracted ray and O′ H is the
emer gent ray. Y ou may observe that the
emergent ray is parallel to the direction of
the incident ray. Why does it happen so? The
extent of bending of the ray of light at the
opposite parallel faces AB (air -glass inter face)
and CD (glass-air interface) of the rectangular
glass slab is equal and opposite. This is why
the ray emerges parallel to the incident ray.
However , the light ray is shifted sidewar d
slightly. What happens when a light ray is
incident normally to the interface of two
media? T ry and find out.
Now you are familiar with the refraction of light. Refraction is due to
change in the speed of light as it enters from one transparent medium to
another . Experiments show that r efraction of light occurs accor ding to
certain laws.Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.
Place a rectangular glass slab over the sheet in the middle.
Draw the outline of the slab with a pencil. Let us name the outline
as ABCD.
Take four identical pins.
Fix two pins, say E and F , vertically such that the line joining the
pins is inclined to the edge AB.
Look for the images of the pins E and F through the opposite edge.
Fix two other pins, say G and H, such that these pins and the
images of E and F lie on a straight line.
Remove the pins and the slab.
Join the positions of tip of the pins E and F and produce the line
up to AB. Let EF meet AB at O. Similarly, join the positions of tip
of the pins G and H and produce it up to the edge CD. Let HG
meet CD at O ′.
Join O and O ′. Also produce EF up to P , as shown by a dotted line
in Fig. .
Refraction of light through a rectangular glass slab
(i)The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the interface
of two transparent media at the point of incidence, all lie in the
same plane.
(ii)The ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of
refraction is a constant, for the light of a given colour and for
the given pair of media. This law is also known as Snell’s law of
refraction. (This is true for angle < i < 90o)
If i is the angle of incidence and r is the angle of refraction, then,
sin
sini
r = constant (.)
This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium
with respect to the first. Let us study about refractive index in some detail.
. The Refractive Index
You have alr eady studied that a ray of light that travels obliquely fr om
one transparent medium into another will change its direction in the
second medium. The extent of the change in direction that takes place
in a given pair of media may be expressed in terms of the refractive index,
the “constant” appearing on the right-hand side of Eq.(.).
The refractive index can be linked to an important physical quantity,
the relative speed of propagation of light in different media. It turns
out that light propagates with different speeds in different media. Light
travels fastest in vacuum with speed of × m s–. In air , the speed of
light is only marginally less, compared to that in vacuum. It reduces
considerably in glass or water . The value of the r efractive index for a
given pair of media depends upon the speed of light in the two media, as
given below.
Consider a ray of light travelling from medium into medium , as
shown in Fig. Let v1 be the speed of light in medium and v2 be the
speed of light in medium . The refractive index of medium with respect
to medium is given by the ratio of the speed of light in medium and
the speed of light in medium . This is usually represented by the symbol
n21. This can be expressed in an equation form as
n21=Speed of light in medium
Speed of light in medium =v
v1
(.)
By the same argument, the refractive index of medium
with respect to medium is represented as n12. It is given
by
n12=Speed of light in medium
Speed of light in medium =v
v2
(.)
If medium is vacuum or air , then the r efractive index of medium
is considered with respect to vacuum. This is called the absolute refractive
index of the medium. It is simply represented as n2. If c is the speed ofLight – Reflection and Refraction 149The ability of a medium to refract light is also expressed in terms of its optical density.
Optical density has a definite connotation. It is not the same as mass density. W e have
been using the ter ms ‘rar er medium’ and ‘denser medium’ in this Chapter . It actually
means ‘optically rarer medium’ and ‘optically denser medium’, respectively. When can
we say that a medium is optically denser than the other? In comparing two media, the
one with the lar ger refractive index is optically denser medium than the other . The other
medium of lower refractive index is optically rar er. The speed of light is higher in a rar er
medium than a denser medium. Thus, a ray of light travelling from a rarer medium to a
denser medium slows down and bends towards the normal. When it travels from a
denser medium to a rarer medium, it speeds up and bends away from the normal.Note from Table . that an optically denser medium may not possess
greater mass density. For example, kerosene having higher refractive
index, is optically denser than water , although its mass density is less
than water .Material Refractive Material Refractive
medium index medium index
Air . Canada .
Balsam
Ice .
Water . Rock salt .
Alcohol .
Kerosene . Carbon .
disulphide
Fused .
quartz Dense .
flint glass
Turpentine .
oil Ruby .
Benzene .
Sapphire .
Crown .
glass Diamondlight in air and v is the speed of light in the medium, then, the refractive
index of the medium nm is given by
nm = Speed of light in air
Speed of light in the medium =c
v(.)
The absolute refractive index of a medium is simply called its refractive
index. The refractive index of several media is given in Table . From
the T able you can know that the r efractive index of water , nw = .
This means that the ratio of the speed of light in air and the speed of
light in water is equal to . Similarly, the refractive index of crown
glass, ng =. Such data ar e helpful in many places. However , you
need not memorise the data.
Table . Absolute refractive index of some material mediaMore to Know!
You might have seen watchmakers using a small magnifying glass to
see tiny parts. Have you ever touched the surface of a magnifying glass
with your hand? Is it plane surface or curved? Is it thicker in the middle
or at the edges? The glasses used in spectacles and that by a watchmaker
are examples of lenses. What is a lens? How does it bend light rays? W e
shall discuss these in this section.
A transparent material bound by two surfaces, of which one or both
surfaces are spherical, forms a lens. This means
that a lens is bound by at least one spherical
surface. In such lenses, the other surface would
be plane. A lens may have two spherical
surfaces, bulging outwards. Such a lens is called
a double convex lens. It is simply called a convex
lens. It is thicker at the middle as compared to
the edges. Convex lens converges light rays as
shown in Fig. . (a). Hence convex lenses are
also called converging lenses. Similarly, a double
concave lens is bounded by two spherical
surfaces, curved inwards. It is thicker at the
edges than at the middle. Such lenses diverge
light rays as shown in Fig. . (b). Such lenses
are also called diverging lenses. A double concave
lens is simply called a concave lens.
A lens, either a convex lens or a concave lens,
has two spherical surfaces. Each of these surfaces
forms a part of a sphere. The centres of these
spheres are called centres of curvature of the lens.
The centre of curvature of a lens is usually
represented by the letter C. Since there are two
centres of curvature, we may represent them as C1 and C2. An imaginary
straight line passing through the two centres of curvature of a lens is
called its principal axis. The central point of a lens is its optical centre. It isQUESTIONS
?. A ray of light travelling in air enters obliquely into water . Does the light
ray bend towards the normal or away from the normal? Why?
. Light enters from air to glass having refractive index . What is the
speed of light in the glass? The speed of light in vacuum is × m s–.
. Find out, from Table ., the medium having highest optical density.
Also find the medium with lowest optical density.
. You ar e given ker osene, turpentine and water . In which of these does
the light travel fastest? Use the information given in Table .
. The refractive index of diamond is . What is the meaning of this
statement?
(a)
(a) Converging action of a convex lens, (b) diverging
action of a concave lens(b)
Light – Reflection and Refraction 151usually represented by the letter O. A ray of light through the optical
centre of a lens passes without suffering any deviation. The effective
diameter of the circular outline of a spherical lens is called its aperture.
We shall confine our discussion in this Chapter to such lenses whose
aperture is much less than its radius of curvature and the two centres of
curvatures are equidistant from the optical centre O. Such lenses are
called thin lenses with small apertures. What happens when parallel rays
of light are incident on a lens? Let us do an CAUTION : Do not look at the Sun directly or through a lens while
doing this do so.
Hold a convex lens in your hand. Direct it towards the Sun.
Focus the light fr om the Sun on a sheet of paper . Obtain a sharp
bright image of the Sun.
Hold the paper and the lens in the same position for a while. Keep
observing the paper . What happened? Why? Recall your experience
in The paper begins to burn producing smoke. It may even catch fire
after a while. Why does this happen? The light from the Sun constitutes
parallel rays of light. These rays were converged by the lens at the sharp
bright spot for med on the paper . In fact, the bright spot you got on the
paper is a real image of the Sun. The concentration of the sunlight at a
point generated heat. This caused the paper to burn.
Now, we shall consider rays of light parallel to the principal axis of a
lens. What happens when you pass such rays of light through a lens?
This is illustrated for a convex lens in Fig. (a) and for a concave lens
in Fig. (b).
Observe Fig. (a) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the
principal axis are falling on a convex lens. These rays, after refraction
from the lens, are converging to a point on the principal axis. This point
on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the lens. Let us see
now the action of a concave lens.
Observe Fig. (b) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the
principal axis are falling on a concave lens. These rays, after refraction
from the lens, are appearing to diverge from a point on the principal
axis. This point on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the
concave lens.
If you pass parallel rays from the opposite surface of the lens, you
get another principal focus on the opposite side. Letter F is usually used
to represent principal focus. However , a lens has two principal foci. They
are represented by F1 and F2. The distance of the principal focus from
the optical centre of a lens is called its focal length. The letter f is used to
represent the focal length. How can you find the focal length of a convex
lens? Recall the position of the lens and the position of the image of the Sun gives the
approximate focal length of the lens.
Lenses form images by refracting light. How do lenses form images?
What is their nature? Let us study this for a convex lens first.
Take a convex lens. Find its approximate focal length in a way
described in Draw five parallel straight lines, using chalk, on a long Table such
that the distance between the successive lines is equal to the
focal length of the lens.
Place the lens on a lens stand. Place it on the central line such
that the optical centre of the lens lies just over the line.
The two lines on either side of the lens correspond to F and 2F of
the lens respectively. Mark them with appropriate letters such as
2F1, F1, F2 and 2F2, respectively.
Place a burning candle, far beyond 2F1 to the left. Obtain a clear
sharp image on a screen on the opposite side of the lens.
Note down the nature, position and relative size of the image.
Repeat this and 2F1 at F1, between F1 and O. Note down and tabulate your
observations.
The nature, position and relative size of the image formed by convex
lens for various positions of the object is summarised in Table .
Let us now do an size of the image formed by a concave lens.Table . Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a convex lens for various
positions of the object
Position of the Position of Relative size of Nature of
object the image the image the image
At infinity At focus F2Highly diminished, Real and inverted
point-sized
Beyond 2F1Between F2 and 2F2Diminished Real and inverted
At 2F1At 2F2Same size Real and inverted
Between F1 and 2F1Beyond 2F2Enlarged Real and inverted
At focus F1At infinity Infinitely large or Real and inverted
highly enlarged
Between focus F1On the same side Enlarged Virtual and erect
and of the lens as the
optical centre O object
Light – Reflection and Refraction 153The summary of the above Take a concave lens. Place it on a lens stand.
Place a burning candle on one side of the lens.
Look through the lens from the other side and observe the image.
Try to get the image on a screen, if possible. If not, observe the
image directly through the lens.
Note down the nature, relative size and approximate position of
the image.
Move the candle away from the lens. Note the change in the size
of the image. What happens to the size of the image when the
candle is placed too far away from the lens.
What conclusion can you draw from this will always give a virtual, erect and diminished image, irrespective of the
position of the object.
. Image F ormation in Lenses Using Ray Diagrams
We can r epresent image for mation by lenses using ray diagrams. Ray
diagrams will also help us to study the nature, position and relative size
of the image formed by lenses. For drawing ray diagrams in lenses, alike
of spherical mirrors, we consider any two of the following rays –
(i)A ray of light from the object, parallel to the principal axis, after
refraction from a convex lens, passes through the principal focus
on the other side of the lens, as shown in Fig. . (a). In case of
a concave lens,
the ray appears
to diverge from
the principal
focus located
on the same
side of the lens,
as shown in
Fig. . (b).(a) (b)Table . Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a concave lens for various
positions of the object
Position of the Position of Relative size of Nature of
object the image the image the image
At infinity At focus F1Highly diminished, Virtual and erect
point-sized
Between infinity and Between focus F1Diminished Virtual and erect
optical centre O and optical centre O
of the lens
through a principal
focus, after refraction
from a convex lens, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is
shown in Fig. . (a). A
ray of light appearing to
meet at the principal
focus of a concave lens,
after refraction, will
emerge parallel to the
principal axis. This is
shown in Fig. (b).
(iii)A ray of light passing
through the optical
centre of a lens will
emerge without any
deviation. This is
illustrated in Fig.(a)
and Fig. (b).(b) (a)
(b) (a)
The ray diagrams for the image formation in a convex lens for a few
positions of the object are shown in Fig. . The ray diagrams
representing the image formation in a concave lens for various positions
of the object are shown in Fig. .
Light – Reflection and Refraction 155The position, size and the nature of the image formed by
a convex lens for various positions of the object
. Sign Convention for Spherical Lenses
For lenses, we follow sign convention, similar to the one used for spherical
mirrors. W e apply the rules for signs of distances, except that all
measurements are taken from the optical centre of the lens. According
to the convention, the focal length of a convex lens is positive and that of
a concave lens is negative. Y ou must take car e to apply appropriate
signs for the values of u, v, f, object height h and image height h′.
. Lens F ormula and Magnification
As we have a formula for spherical mirrors, we also have formula for
spherical lenses. This formula gives the relationship between object-
distance ( u), image-distance ( v) and the focal length ( f). The lens formula
is expressed as v u f− = (.)
The lens formula given above is general and is valid in all situations
for any spherical lens. Take proper care of the signs of different quantities,
while putting numerical values for solving problems relating to lenses.
The magnification produced by a lens, similar to that for spherical
mirrors, is defined as the ratio of the height of the image and the height
of the object. Magnification is represented by the letter m . If h is the
height of the object and h′ is the height of the image given by a lens, then
the magnification produced by the lens is given by,
m = Height of the Image
Height of the object=h
h′(.)
Magnification produced by a lens is also related to the object-distance
u, and the image-distance v. This relationship is given by
Magnification (m ) = h′/h = v/u (.)
Example .
A concave lens has focal length of cm. At what distance should
the object from the lens be placed so that it forms an image at cm
from the lens? Also, find the magnification produced by the lens.
Solution
A concave lens always forms a virtual, erect image on the same side
of the object.
Image-distance v =– cm;
Focal length f =– cm;
Object-distance u=?
Since
v u f− =
or, –u v f=
( ) – –– – 15u= = + u− += =−
or, u = – cm
Thus, the object-distance is cm.
Magnification m = v/u
m = −
−= +10cm
30cm1
.;
The positive sign shows that the image is erect and virtual. The image
is one-third of the size of the object.
Example .
A . cm tall object is placed perpendicular to the principal axis of a
convex lens of focal length cm. The distance of the object from the
lens is cm. Find the nature, position and size of the image. Also
find its magnification.
Light – Reflection and Refraction 157Solution
Height of the object h=+ . cm;
Focal length f =+ cm;
object-distance u =– cm;
Image-distance v =?
Height of the image h′=?
Since1
v u f− =
or,
v u f= + ( ) 10v= + = − +− v− += =
or,v = + cm
The positive sign of v shows that the image is formed at a distance of
cm on the other side of the optical centre. The image is real and
inverted.
Magnification m = 'h v
h u=
or,h′ = h (v/u)
Height of the image, h′ = (.) (+/–) = – . cm
Magnification m = v/u
or, 30cm215cmm+= = −−
The negative signs of m and h′ show that the image is inverted and
real. It is formed below the principal axis. Thus, a real, inverted image,
cm tall, is formed at a distance of cm on the other side of the
lens. The image is two times enlarged.
. Power of a Lens
You have alr eady lear nt that the ability of a lens to converge or diver ge
light rays depends on its focal length. For example, a convex lens of
short focal length bends the light rays through large angles, by focussing
them closer to the optical centre. Similarly, concave lens of very short
focal length causes higher divergence than the one with longer focal
length. The degree of convergence or divergence of light rays achieved
by a lens is expr essed in ter ms of its power . The power of a lens is defined
as the r eciprocal of its focal length. It is r epresented by the letter P. The
power P of a lens of focal length
f is given by
P =
f(.)
If f is expressed in metres, then, power is expressed in dioptres. Thus,
dioptre is the power of a lens whose focal length is metre. 1D = 1m–.
You may note that the power of a convex lens is positive and that of a
concave lens is negative.
Opticians prescribe corrective lenses indicating their powers. Let us
say the lens prescribed has power equal to + . D. This means the lens
prescribed is convex. The focal length of the lens is + . m. Similarly,
a lens of power – . D has a focal length of – . m. The lens is concave.
Many optical instruments consist of a number of lenses. They are combined to increase
the magnification and sharpness of the image. The net power ( P) of the lenses placed
in contact is given by the algebraic sum of the individual powers P1, P2, P3, … as
P = P1 + P2 + P3 + …
The use of powers, instead of focal lengths, for lenses is quite convenient for opticians.
During eye-testing, an optician puts several different combinations of corrective lenses
of known power , in contact, inside the testing spectacles’ frame. The optician calculates
the power of the lens required by simple algebraic addition. For example, a combination
of two lenses of power + . D and + . D is equivalent to a single lens of power + . D.
The simple additive property of the powers of lenses can be used to design lens systems
to minimise certain defects in images produced by a single lens. Such a lens system,
consisting of several lenses, in contact, is commonly used in the design of lenses of
camera, microscopes and telescopes.
?. Define dioptre of power of a lens.
. A convex lens forms a real and inverted image of a needle at a distance
of cm from it. Where is the needle placed in front of the convex lens
if the image is equal to the size of the object? Also, find the power of the
lens.
. Find the power of a concave lens of focal length m.
What y ou hav e learnt
Light seems to travel in straight lines.
Mirrors and lenses form images of objects. Images can be either real or virtual,
depending on the position of the object.
The reflecting surfaces, of all types, obey the laws of reflection. The refracting
surfaces obey the laws of refraction.
New Cartesian Sign Conventions are followed for spherical mirrors and lenses.More to Know!
Light – Reflection and Refraction 159Mirror formula, + =v u f, gives the relationship between the object-distance (u ),
image-distance ( v), and focal length (f ) of a spherical mirr or.
The focal length of a spherical mirror is equal to half its radius of curvature.
The magnification produced by a spherical mirror is the ratio of the height of the
image to the height of the object.
A light ray travelling obliquely from a denser medium to a rarer medium bends
away from the normal. A light ray bends towards the normal when it travels obliquely
from a rarer to a denser medium.
Light travels in vacuum with an enormous speed of × m s-. The speed of light
is different in different media.
The refractive index of a transparent medium is the ratio of the speed of light in
vacuum to that in the medium.
In case of a r ectangular glass slab, the r efraction takes place at both air -glass
interface and glass-air interface. The emergent ray is parallel to the direction of
incident ray.
Lens formula, – =v u f, gives the relationship between the object-distance ( u),
image-distance ( v), and the focal length ( f) of a spherical lens.
Power of a lens is the reciprocal of its focal length. The SI unit of power of a lens is
dioptre .
EXERCISES
.Which one of the following materials cannot be used to make a lens?
(a) Water (b) Glass (c) Plastic (d) Clay
.The image formed by a concave mirror is observed to be virtual, erect and larger
than the object. Where should be the position of the object?
(a) Between the principal focus and the centre of curvature
(b) At the centre of curvature
(c) Beyond the centre of curvature
(d) Between the pole of the mirror and its principal focus.
.Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens to get a real image of the
size of the object?
(a) At the principal focus of the lens
(b) At twice the focal length
(c) At infinity
(d) Between the optical centre of the lens and its principal focus.
.A spherical mirror and a thin spherical lens have each a focal length of – cm. The
mirror and the lens are likely to be
(a) both concave.
(b) both convex.
(d) the mirror is convex, but the lens is concave.
.No matter how far you stand fr om a mirr or, your image appears er ect. The mirr or
is likely to be
(a) only plane.
(b) only concave.
(c) only convex.
(d) either plane or convex.
.Which of the following lenses would you prefer to use while reading small letters
found in a dictionary?
(a) A convex lens of focal length cm.
(b) A concave lens of focal length cm.
(c) A convex lens of focal length cm.
(d) A concave lens of focal length cm.
.We wish to obtain an erect image of an object, using a concave mirr or of focal
length cm. What should be the range of distance of the object from the mirror?
What is the nature of the image? Is the image larger or smaller than the object?
Draw a ray diagram to show the image formation in this case.
.Name the type of mirror used in the following situations.
(a) Headlights of a car .
(b) Side/r ear-view mirr or of a vehicle.
(c) Solar furnace.
Support your answer with reason.
.One-half of a convex lens is cover ed with a black paper . Will this lens pr
oduce a
complete image of the object? V erify your answer experimentally. Explain your
observations.
.An object cm in length is held cm away from a converging lens of focal length
cm. Draw the ray diagram and find the position, size and the nature of the
image formed.
. A concave lens of focal length cm forms an image cm from the lens. How far
is the object placed from the lens? Draw the ray diagram.
.An object is placed at a distance of cm from a convex mirror of focal length
cm. Find the position and nature of the image.
.The magnification produced by a plane mirror is +. What does this mean?
.An object . cm in length is placed at a distance of cm in front of a convex
mirror of radius of curvature cm. Find the position of the image, its nature
and size.
.An object of size . cm is placed at cm in front of a concave mirror of focal
length cm. At what distance from the mirror should a screen be placed, so that
a sharp focussed image can be obtained? Find the size and the nature of the image.
.Find the focal length of a lens of power – . D. What type of lens is this?
.A doctor has prescribed a corrective lens of power +. D. Find the focal length of
the lens. Is the prescribed lens diverging or converging? The Human Eye and
the Colourful World10 CHAPTER
You have studied in the pr evious chapter about r efraction of light by
lenses. Y ou also studied the natur
e, position and relative size of
images formed by lenses. How can these ideas help us in the study of
the human eye? The human eye uses light and enables us to see objects
around us. It has a lens in its structure. What is the function of the lens
in a human eye? How do the lenses used in spectacles correct defects of
vision? Let us consider these questions in this chapter .
We have lear nt in the pr evious chapter about light and some of its
properties. In this chapter , we shall use these ideas to study some of the
optical phenomena in natur e. We shall also discuss about rainbow
formation, splitting of white light and blue colour of the sky.
. THE HUMAN EYE
The human eye is one of the most valuable and sensitive sense organs.
It enables us to see the wonderful world and the colours around us. On
closing the eyes, we can identify objects to some extent by their smell,
taste, sound they make or by touch. It is, however , impossible to identify
colours while closing the eyes. Thus, of all the sense organs, the human
eye is the most significant one as it enables us to see the beautiful,
colourful world around us.
The human eye is like a camera. Its lens
system forms an image on a light-sensitive
screen called the retina. Light enters the eye
through a thin membrane called the cornea.
It forms the transparent bulge on the front
surface of the eyeball as shown in Fig. .
The eyeball is approximately spherical in shape
with a diameter of about . cm. Most of the
refraction for the light rays entering the eye
occurs at the outer surface of the cornea. The
crystalline lens merely provides the finer
adjustment of focal length required to focus
objects at dif ferent distances on the r etina. W e find a structur e called iris
behind the cornea. Iris is a dark muscular diaphragm that controls the
size of the pupil. The pupil regulates and controls the amount of light
The human eye
on the retina. The retina is a delicate membrane having enormous
number of light-sensitive cells. The light-sensitive cells get activated
upon illumination and generate electrical signals. These signals are
sent to the brain via the optic nerves. The brain interprets these signals,
and finally, processes the information so that we perceive objects as
they are.
. Power of Accommodation
The eye lens is composed of a fibrous, jelly-like material. Its curvature
can be modified to some extent by the ciliary muscles. The change in the
curvature of the eye lens can thus change its focal length. When the
muscles are relaxed, the lens becomes thin. Thus, its focal length
increases. This enables us to see distant objects clearly. When you are
looking at objects closer to the eye, the ciliary muscles contract. This
incr
eases the curvatur e of the eye lens. The eye lens then becomes thicker .
Consequently, the focal length of the eye lens decreases. This enables
us to see nearby objects clearly.
The ability of the eye lens to adjust its focal length is called
accommodation. However , the focal length of the eye lens cannot be
decreased below a certain minimum limit. T ry to r ead a printed page by
holding it very close to your eyes. Y ou may see the image being blurred
or feel strain in the eye. To see an object comfortably and distinctly, you
must hold it at about cm from the eyes. The minimum distance, at
which objects can be seen most distinctly without strain, is called the
least distance of distinct vision. It is also called the near point of the eye.
For a young adult with normal vision, the near point is about
cm. The farthest point upto which the eye can see objects clearly is
called the far point of the eye. It is infinity for a nor mal eye. Y ou may note
here a normal eye can see objects clearly that are between cm and
infinity.
Sometimes, the crystalline lens of people at old age becomes milky and
cloudy. This condition is called cataract. This causes partial or complete
loss of vision. It is possible to restore vision through a cataract surgery.
. DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10. DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10. DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10. DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION10. DEFECTS OF VISION AND THEIR CORRECTION
Sometimes, the eye may gradually lose its power of accommodation.
In such conditions, the person cannot see the objects distinctly and
comfortably. The vision becomes blurred due to the refractive defects
of the eye.
There are mainly three common refractive defects of vision. These
are (i) myopia or near -sightedness, (ii) Hyper metr opia or far -
sightedness, and (iii) Presbyopia. These defects can be corrected by
the use of suitable spherical lenses. W e discuss below these defects
and their correction.
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld (a)Myopia
Myopia is also known as near -
sightedness. A person with myopia
can see nearby objects clearly but
cannot see distant objects distinctly.
A person with this defect has the far
point nearer than infinity. Such a
person may see clearly upto a
distance of a few metres. In a myopic
eye, the image of a distant object is
formed in front of the retina [Fig.
. (b)] and not at the retina itself.
This defect may arise due to (i)
excessive curvature of the eye lens,
or (ii) elongation of the eyeball. This
defect can be corrected by using a
concave lens of suitable power . This
is illustrated in Fig. . (c). A
concave lens of suitable power will
bring the image back on to the
retina and thus the defect is corrected.
(b)Hypermetropia
Hyper metropia is also known as far -sightedness.
A person with hypermetropia can see distant
objects clearly but cannot see nearby objects
distinctly. The near point, for the person, is farther
away from the normal near point ( cm). Such a
person has to keep a reading material much
beyond cm from the eye for comfortable
reading. This is because the light rays from a
closeby object are focussed at a point behind the
retina as shown in Fig. . (b). This defect arises
either because (i) the focal length of the eye lens is
too long, or (ii) the eyeball has become too small.
This defect can be corrected by using a convex
lens of appr
opriate power . This is illustrated in
Fig. . (c). Eye-glasses with converging lenses
provide the additional focussing power required
for forming the image on the retina.
(c) Presbyopia
The power of accommodation of the eye usually
decreases with ageing. For most people, the near
point gradually recedes away. They find it difficult
to see nearby objects comfortably and distinctly
without corrective eye-glasses. This defect is
called Presbyopia. It arises due to the gradual(a), (b) The myopic eye, and (c) correction for myopia with a
concave lens
(a), (b) The hypermetropic eye, and (c)
correction for hypermetropia
N = Near point of a
hypermetropic eye.
N’ = Near point of a
normal eye.
You talk of wondr ous things you see,
You say the sun shines bright;
I feel him warm, but how can he
Or make it day or night ?
– C. CIBBER
Do you know that our eyes can live even after our death? By donating our eyes after we
die, we can light the life of a blind person.
About million people in the developing world are blind and most of them can be
cured. About . million people with corneal blindness can be cured through corneal
transplantation of donated eyes. Out of these . million, % are children below the
age of . So, if we have got the gift of vision, why not pass it on to somebody who does
not have it? What do we have to keep in mind when eyes have to be donated?
Eye donors can belong to any age group or sex. People who use spectacles, or those
operated for cataract, can still donate the eyes. People who are diabetic, have
hypertension, asthma patients and those without communicable diseases can also
donate eyes.weakening of the ciliary muscles and diminishing flexibility of the
eye lens. Sometimes, a person may suffer from both myopia and
hypermetropia. Such people often require bi-focal lenses. A common
type of bi-focal lenses consists of both concave and convex lenses.
The upper portion consists of a concave lens. It facilitates distant
vision. The lower part is a convex lens. It facilitates near vision.
These days, it is possible to correct the refractive defects with
contact lenses or through surgical interventions.
?. What is meant by power of accommodation of the eye?
. A person with a myopic eye cannot see objects beyond . m distinctly.
What should be the type of the corrective lens used to restore proper
vision?
. What is the far point and near point of the human eye with normal
vision?
. A student has difficulty reading the blackboard while sitting in the last
row. What could be the defect the child is suffering from? How can it be
corrected?
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld . REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10. REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10. REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10. REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM10. REFRACTION OF LIGHT THROUGH A PRISM
You have lear nt how light gets r efracted thr
ough a rectangular glass
slab. For parallel refracting surfaces, as in a glass slab, the emergent ray
is parallel to the incident ray. However , it is slightly displaced laterally.
How would light get refracted through a transparent prism? Consider a
triangular glass prism. It has two triangular bases and three rectangular
lateral sur faces. These sur faces are inclined to each other . The angle
between its two lateral faces is called the angle of the prism. Let us now
do an activity to study the refraction of light through a triangular glass
prism.Eyes must be removed within - hours after death. Inform the nearest eye bank
immediately.
The eye bank team will remove the eyes at the home of the deceased or at a hospital.
Eye removal takes only - minutes. It is a simple process and does not lead to
any disfigurement.
Persons who were infected with or died because of AIDS, Hepatitis B or C, rabies,
acute leukaemia, tetanus, cholera, meningitis or encephalitis cannot donate eyes.
An eye bank collects, evaluates and distributes the donated eyes. All eyes donated are
evaluated using strict medical standards. Those donated eyes found unsuitable for
transplantation are used for valuable research and medical education. The identities
of both the donor and the recipient remain confidential.
One pair of eyes gives vision to up to FOUR CORNEAL BLIND PEOPLE.
Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins.
Place a glass prism on it in such a way that it rests on its triangular
base. Trace the outline of the prism using a pencil.
Draw a straight line PE inclined to one of the refracting surfaces,
say AB, of the prism.
Fix two pins, say at points P and Q, on the line PE as shown in
Fig. .
Look for the images of the pins, fixed at P and Q, through the
other face AC.
Fix two more pins, at points R and S, such that the pins at R and
S and the images of the pins at P and Q lie on the same straight
line.
Remove the pins and the glass prism.
The line PE meets the boundary of the prism at point E
(see Fig. .). Similarly, join and produce the points R and S. Let
these lines meet the boundary of the prism at E and F , respectively.
Join E and F .
Draw perpendiculars to the refracting surfaces AB and AC of the
prism at points E and F , respectively.
Mark the angle of incidence ( ∠i), the angle of refraction ( ∠r) and
the angle of emergence ( ∠e) as shown in Fig. .
Take a thick sheet of cardboard and make a small hole or narrow
slit in its middle.
Allow sunlight to fall on the narrow slit. This gives a narrow beam
of white light.
Now, take a glass prism and allow the light from the slit to fall on
one of its faces as shown in Fig. .
Turn the prism slowly until the light that comes out of it appears
on a nearby screen.
What do you observe? Y ou will find a beautiful band of colours.
Why does this happen?Here PE is the incident ray, EF is the refracted ray and FS is the
emergent ray. Y ou may note that a ray of light is entering fr
om air to
glass at the first surface AB. The light ray on refraction has bent towards
the normal. At the second surface AC, the light ray has entered from
glass to air . Hence it has bent away fr om nor mal. Compar e the angle of
incidence and the angle of refraction at each refracting surface of the
prism. Is this similar to the kind of bending that occurs in a glass slab?
The peculiar shape of the prism makes the emergent ray bend at an
angle to the direction of the incident ray. This angle is called the angle of
deviation. In this case ∠ D is the angle of deviation. Mark the angle of
deviation in the above activity and measure it.
. DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10. DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10. DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10. DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL10. DISPERSION OF WHITE LIGHT BY A GL ASS PRISM ASS PRISMASS PRISM ASS PRISMASS PRISM
You must have seen and appr eciated the spectacular colours in a rainbow.
How could the white light of the Sun give us various colours of the
rainbow? Before we take up this question, we shall first go back to the
refraction of light through a prism. The inclined refracting surfaces of a
glass prism show exciting phenomenon. Let us find it out through an
activity.PE – Incident ray ∠i – Angle of incidence
EF – Refracted ray ∠r – Angle of refraction
FS – Emergent ray ∠e – Angle of emergence
∠A – Angle of the prism ∠D – Angle of deviation
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld 167The prism has probably split the incident
white light into a band of colours. Note the
colours that appear at the two ends of the
colour band. What is the sequence of colours
that you see on the screen? The various
colours seen are Violet, Indigo, Blue, Green,
Yellow, Orange and Red, as shown in
Fig. . The acronym VIBGYOR will help
you to remember the sequence of colours.
The band of the coloured components of a
light beam is called its spectrum. Y ou might
not be able to see all the colours separately.
Yet something makes each colour distinct fr om the other . The splitting
of light into its component colours is called dispersion.
You have seen that white light is dispersed
into its seven-colour components by a prism.
Why do we get these colours? Different colours
of light bend through different angles with
respect to the incident ray, as they pass
through a prism. The red light bends the least
while the violet the most. Thus the rays of each
colour emerge along different paths and thus
become distinct. It is the band of distinct
colours that we see in a spectrum.
Isaac Newton was the first to use a glass prism to obtain
the spectrum of sunlight. He tried to split the colours of
the spectrum of white light further by using another similar
prism. However , he could not get any mor e colours. He
then placed a second identical prism in an inverted position
with respect to the first prism, as shown in Fig. . This
allowed all the colours of the spectrum to pass through
the second prism. He found a beam of white light emerging
from the other side of the second prism. This observation
gave Newton the idea that the sunlight is made up of seven
colours.
Any light that gives a spectrum similar to that of
sunlight is often referred to as white light.
A rainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky
after a rain shower (Fig. .). It is caused by dispersion
of sunlight by tiny water droplets, present in the
atmosphere. A rainbow is always formed in a direction
opposite to that of the Sun. The water droplets act like
small prisms. They refract and disperse the incident
sunlight, then reflect it internally, and finally refract it
again when it comes out of the raindrop (Fig. .). Due
to the dispersion of light and internal reflection, different
colours reach the observer’s eye.
You can also see a rainbow on a sunny day when
you look at the sky through a waterfall or through a water
fountain, with the Sun behind you.white light
Atmospheric refraction
effects at sunrise and
sunset10. ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION
You might have observed the apparent random wavering or
flickering of objects seen through a turbulent stream of hot air
rising above a fir e or a radiator . The air just above the fir e becomes
hotter than the air further up. The hotter air is lighter (less dense)
than the cooler air above it, and has a refractive index slightly
less than that of the cooler air . Since the physical conditions of
the refracting medium (air) are not stationary, the apparent
position of the object, as seen thr ough the hot air , fluctuates.
This wavering is thus an effect of atmospheric refraction (refraction
of light by the earth’s atmosphere) on a small scale in our local
environment. The twinkling of stars is a similar phenomenon on
a much larger scale. Let us see how we can explain it.
Twinkling of stars
The twinkling of a star is due to atmospheric refraction of starlight. The
starlight, on entering the earth’s atmosphere, undergoes refraction
continuously before it reaches the earth. The atmospheric refraction
occurs in a medium of gradually changing refractive index. Since the
atmosphere bends starlight towards the normal, the apparent position
of the star is slightly different from its actual position. The star appears
slightly higher (above) than its actual position when viewed near the
horizon (Fig. .). Further , this apparent position of the star is not
stationary, but keeps on changing slightly, since the physical conditions
of the earth’s atmosphere are not stationary, as was the case in the
previous paragraph. Since the stars are very distant, they approximate
point-sized sources of light. As the path of rays of light coming from
the star goes on varying slightly, the apparent position of the star
fluctuates and the amount of starlight entering the eye flickers – the
star sometimes appears brighter , and at some other time, fainter , which
is the twinkling effect.
Why don’t the planets twinkle? The p lanets are much
closer to the earth, and are thus seen as extended sources.
If we consider a planet as a collection of a large number
of point-sized sources of light, the total variation in the
amount of light entering our eye from all the individual
point-sized sources will average out to zero, thereby
nullifying the twinkling effect.
Advance sunrise and delayed sunset
The Sun is visible to us about minutes before the actual
sunrise, and about minutes after the actual sunset
because of atmospheric refraction. By actual sunrise, we
mean the actual crossing of the horizon by the Sun. Fig.
. shows the actual and apparent positions of the
Sun with respect to the horizon. The time difference
between actual sunset and the apparent sunset is about
minutes. The apparent flattening of the Sun’s disc at
sunrise and sunset is also due to the same phenomenon .Apparent star position
due to atmospheric
refraction
The Human Eye and the Colour ful W orld . SC ATTERING OF LIGHT
The interplay of light with objects around us gives rise to several
spectacular phenomena in nature. The blue colour of the sky, colour of
water in deep sea, the reddening of the sun at sunrise and the sunset
are some of the wonderful phenomena we are familiar with. In the previous
class, you have learnt about the scattering of light by colloidal particles.
The path of a beam of light passing through a true solution is not visible.
However , its path becomes visible thr ough a colloidal solution wher e the
size of the particles is r elatively lar ger.
. T yndall Effect
The earth’s atmosphere is a heterogeneous mixture of minute particles.
These particles include smoke, tiny water droplets, suspended particles
of dust and molecules of air . When a beam of light strikes such fine
particles, the path of the beam becomes visible. The light reaches us,
after being reflected diffusely by these particles. The phenomenon of
scattering of light by the colloidal particles gives rise to Tyndall effect
which you have studied in Class IX. This phenomenon is seen when a
fine beam of sunlight enters a smoke-filled room through a small hole.
Thus, scattering of light makes the particles visible. Tyndall effect can
also be observed when sunlight passes through a canopy of a dense
forest. Here, tiny water droplets in the mist scatter light.
The colour of the scattered light depends on the size of the scattering
particles. V ery fine particles scatter mainly blue light while particles of
larger size scatter light of longer wavelengths. If the size of the scattering
particles is large enough, then, the scattered light may even appear
white.
. Why is the colour of the clear Sky Blue?
The molecules of air and other fine particles in the atmosphere have size
smaller than the wavelength of visible light. These are more effective in
scattering light of shorter wavelengths at the blue end than light of longer
wavelengths at the red end. The red light has a wavelength about .
times greater than blue light. Thus, when sunlight passes through the
atmosphere, the fine particles in air scatter the blue colour (shorter
wavelengths) more strongly than red. The scattered blue light enters
our eyes. If the earth had no atmosphere, there would not have been
any scattering. Then, the sky would have looked dark. The sky appears
dark to passengers flying at very high altitudes, as scattering is not
prominent at such heights.
You might have observed that ‘danger’ signal lights ar e red in colour .
Do you know why? The red is least scattered by fog or smoke. Therefore,
it can be seen in the same colour at a distance.
The ability of the eye to focus on both near and distant objects, by adjusting its
focal length, is called the accommodation of the eye.
The smallest distance, at which the eye can see objects clearly without strain, is
called the near point of the eye or the least distance of distinct vision. For a young
adult with normal vision, it is about cm.
The common refractive defects of vision include myopia, hypermetropia and
presbyopia. Myopia (short-sightedness – the image of distant objects is focussed
befor e the r etina) is corr ected by using a concave lens of suitable power .
Hyper metropia (far -sightedness – the image of nearby objects is focussed beyond
the retina) is corr
ected by using a convex lens of suitable power . The eye loses its
power of accommodation at old age.
The splitting of white light into its component colours is called dispersion.
Scattering of light causes the blue colour of sky.
EXERCISES
.The human eye can focus on objects at different distances by adjusting the focal
length of the eye lens. This is due to
(a) presbyopia. (b) accommodation.
(c) near-sightedness. (d) far-sightedness.
.The human eye forms the image of an object at its
(a)cornea. (b) iris. (c) pupil. (d) retina.
.The least distance of distinct vision for a young adult with normal vision is about
(a) m. (b) . cm. (c) cm. (d) . m.
.The change in focal length of an eye lens is caused by the action of the
(a)pupil. (b) retina. (c)ciliary muscles. (d) iris.
.A person needs a lens of power –. dioptres for correcting his distant vision. For
correcting his near vision he needs a lens of power +. dioptre. What is the focal
length of the lens required for correcting (i) distant vision, and (ii) near vision?
.The far point of a myopic person is cm in front of the eye. What is the nature and
power of the lens required to correct the problem?
.Make a diagram to show how hypermetropia is corrected. The near point of a
hypermetropic eye is m. What is the power of the lens required to correct this
defect? Assume that the near point of the normal eye is cm.
.Why is a normal eye not able to see clearly the objects placed closer than cm?
.What happens to the image distance in the eye when we increase the distance of an
object from the eye?
.Why do stars twinkle?
.Explain why the planets do not twinkle.
.Why does the sky appear dark instead of blue to an astronaut? Electricity11 CHAPTER
Electricity has an important place in modern society. It is a controllable
and convenient form of energy for a variety of uses in homes, schools,
hospitals, industries and so on. What constitutes electricity? How does
it flow in an electric circuit? What are the factors that control or regulate
the curr ent thr ough an electric cir cuit? In this Chapter , we shall attempt
to answer such questions. W e shall also discuss the heating ef fect of
electric current and its applications.
. ELECTRIC CURRENT AND CIRCUIT11. ELECTRIC CURRENT AND CIRCUIT11. ELECTRIC CURRENT AND CIRCUIT11. ELECTRIC CURRENT AND CIRCUIT11. ELECTRIC CURRENT AND CIRCUIT
We are familiar with air curr ent and water curr ent. W e know that flowing
water constitute water current in rivers. Similarly, if the electric charge
flows through a conductor (for example, through a metallic wire), we
say that ther e is an electric curr ent in the conductor . In a tor ch, we
know that the cells (or a battery, when placed in proper order) provide
flow of char ges or an electric curr ent thr ough the tor ch bulb to glow. W e
have also seen that the torch gives light only when its switch is on. What
does a switch do? A switch makes a conducting link between the cell and
the bulb. A continuous and closed path of an electric current is called an
electric circuit. Now, if the circuit is broken anywhere (or the switch of the
torch is turned off), the current stops flowing and the bulb does not glow.
How do we express electric current? Electric current is expressed by
the amount of charge flowing through a particular area in unit time. In
other words, it is the rate of flow of electric charges. In circuits using
metallic wir es, electr ons constitute the flow of char ges. However , electr ons
were not known at the time when the phenomenon of electricity was first
observed. So, electric current was considered to be the flow of positive
charges and the direction of flow of positive charges was taken to be the
direction of electric current. Conventionally, in an electric circuit the
direction of electric current is taken as opposite to the direction of the
flow of electrons, which are negative charges.
time t , then the current I, through the cross-section is
IQ
t= (.)
The SI unit of electric charge is coulomb (C), which is equivalent to
the char ge contained in nearly × electr ons. (W e know that an
electron possesses a negative charge of . × – C.) The electric
current is expressed by a unit called ampere (A), named after the
French scientist, Andre-Marie Ampere (–). One ampere is
constituted by the flow of one coulomb of charge per second, that is,
A = C/ s. Small quantities of current are expressed in milliampere
( mA = – A) or in microampere ( µA = – A).
An instrument called ammeter measures electric
current in a circuit. It is always connected in series
in a circuit through which the current is to be
measured. diagram of a typical electric circuit comprising a
cell, an electric bulb, an ammeter and a plug key.
Note that the electric current flows in the circuit
from the positive ter minal of the cell to the negative
terminal of the cell thr ough the bulb and ammeter .
A schematic diagram of an electric circuit
comprising – cell, electric bulb, ammeter and
plug key
?Example .
A current of . A is drawn by a filament of an electric bulb for
minutes. Find the amount of electric charge that flows through the
circuit.
Solution
We are given, I = . A; t = min = s.
From Eq. (.), we have
Q=It
=. A × s
= C
. What does an electric circuit mean?
. Define the unit of current.
. Calculate the number of electrons constituting one coulomb of charge.
Electricity . ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE11. ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE11. ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE11. ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE11. ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE
What makes the electric charge to flow? Let us consider the analogy of
flow of water . Char ges do not flow in a copper wir e by themselves, just as
water in a perfectly horizontal tube does not flow. If one end of the tube
is connected to a tank of water kept at a higher level, such that there is a
pressure difference between the two ends of the tube, water flows out of
the other end of the tube. For flow of charges in a conducting metallic
wire, the gravity, of course, has no role to play; the electrons move only
if there is a difference of electric pressure – called the potential differenc e –
along the conductor . This dif ference of potential may be pr oduced by a
battery, consisting of one or more electric cells. The chemical action within
a cell generates the potential difference across the terminals of the cell,
even when no current is drawn from it. When the cell is connected to a
conducting circuit element, the potential difference sets the charges in
motion in the conductor and produces an electric current. In order to
maintain the current in a given electric circuit, the cell has to expend its
chemical energy stored in it.
We define the electric potential dif ference between two points in an
electric circuit carrying some current as the work done to move a unit
charge from one point to the other –
Potential dif fer
ence ( V) between two points = Work done ( W)/Char ge (Q)
V=W/Q (.)
The SI unit of electric potential difference is volt (V), named after
Alessandr o Volta ( –), an Italian physicist. One volt is the
potential difference between two points in a current carrying conductor
when joule of work is done to move a charge of coulomb from one
point to the other .
Therefore, volt = joule
coulomb
(.)
V = J C–
The potential difference is measured by means of an instrument called
the voltmeter . The voltmeter is always connected in parallel across the
points between which the potential difference is to be measured.
Example .
How much work is done in moving a charge of C across two points
having a potential difference V?
Solution
The amount of charge Q, that flows between two points at potential
difference V (= V) is C. Thus, the amount of work W, done in
moving the charge [from Eq. (.)] is
= V × C
= J.
?
. CIRCUIT DIAGRAM11. CIRCUIT DIAGRAM11. CIRCUIT DIAGRAM11. CIRCUIT DIAGRAM11. CIRCUIT DIAGRAM
We know that an electric cir cuit, as shown in Fig. ., comprises a cell
(or a battery), a plug key, electrical component(s), and connecting wires.
It is often convenient to draw a schematic diagram, in which different
components of the circuit are represented by the symbols conveniently
used. Conventional symbols used to represent some of the most
commonly used electrical components are given in Table .
Table . Symbols of some commonly used components in circuit diagrams
Sl. Components Symbols
No.
An electric cell
A battery or a combination of cells
Plug key or switch (open)
Plug key or switch (closed)
A wire joint
Wires crossing without joining1. Name a device that helps to maintain a potential difference across a
conductor .
. What is meant by saying that the potential difference between two points
is V?
. How much energy is given to each coulomb of charge passing through a
V battery?
Electricity . OHM’S LA11. OHM’S LA11. OHM’S LA11. OHM’S LA11. OHM’S LA W WW WW
Is there a relationship between the potential difference across a conductor
and the current through it? Let us explore with an Set up a circuit as shown in Fig. .,
consisting of a nichrome wire XY of length,
say . m, an ammeter , a voltmeter and
four cells of . V each. (Nichrome is an
alloy of nickel, chromium, manganese, and
iron metals.)
First use only one cell as the source in the
circuit. Note the reading in the ammeter I,
for the current and reading of the voltmeter
V for the potential difference across the
nichrome wire XY in the circuit. Tabulate
them in the Table given.
Next connect two cells in the circuit and
note the respective readings of the ammeter and voltmeter for the values of current through
the nichrome wire and potential difference across the nichrome wire.
Repeat the above steps using three cells and then four cells in the circuit separately.
Calculate the ratio of V to I for each pair of potential difference V and current I.
S. Number of cells Current through Potential difference V/I
No. used in the the nichrome across the (volt/ampere)
circuit wire, I nichrome
(ampere) wire, V (volt) Plot a graph between V and I, and observe the nature of the graph. Electric bulb or
A resistor of resistance R
Variable r esistance or r heostat or
Ammeter
Voltmeter
V–I graph for a nichrome wire. A
straight line plot shows that as the
current through a wire increases, the
potential difference across the wire
increases linearly – this is Ohm’s law.
Take a nichrome wire, a torch bulb, a W bulb and an ammeter ( – A range), a plug
key and some connecting wires.
Set up the circuit by connecting four dry cells of . V each in series with the ammeter
leaving a gap XY in the circuit, as shown in Fig. .In this same value for V/I is obtained in each case. Thus the V–I
graph is a straight line that passes through the origin of
the graph, as shown in Fig. . Thus,
V/I is a constant
ratio.
In , a German physicist Georg Simon Ohm
(–) found out the relationship between the current
I, flowing in a metallic wire and the potential difference
across its terminals. The potential difference, V, across the
ends of a given metallic wire in an electric circuit is directly
proportional to the current flowing through it, provided its
temperature remains the same. This is called Ohm’s law. In
other words –
V ∝ I (.)
or V/I =constant
=R
or V =IR (.)
In Eq. (.), R is a constant for the given metallic wire
at a given temperature and is called its resistance. It is the
property of a conductor to resist the flow of charges through it. Its SI
unit is ohm, r epresented by the Gr eek letter Ω. Accor ding to Ohm’s law,
R = V/I (.)
If the potential difference across the two ends of a conductor is V
and the current through it is A, then the resistance R, of the conductor
is Ω. That is, ohm = volt
ampere
Also from Eq. (.) we get
I = V/R (.)
It is obvious from Eq. (.) that the current through a resistor is
inversely proportional to its resistance. If the resistance is doubled the
current gets halved. In many practical cases it is necessary to increase
or decrease the current in an electric circuit. A component used to
regulate current without changing the voltage source is called variable
resistance. In an electric circuit, a device called rheostat is often used to
change the resistance in the cir cuit. W e will now study about electrical
resistance of a conductor with the help of following
Electricity 177In this components. Why do they differ? Certain components offer an easy path
for the flow of electric curr ent while the others r esist the flow. W e know
that motion of electrons in an electric circuit constitutes an electric
current. The electr ons, however , are not completely fr ee to move within a
conductor . They ar e restrained by the attraction of the atoms among
which they move. Thus, motion of electrons through a conductor is
retarded by its resistance. A component of a given size that offers a low
resistance is a good conductor . A conductor having some appreciable
resistance is called a r esistor . A component of identical size that of fers a
higher r esistance is a poor conductor . An insulator of the same size of fers
even higher resistance.
. FA11. FA11. FA
. FA11. FA CTORS ON WHICH THE RESISTCTORS ON WHICH THE RESISTCTORS ON WHICH THE RESISTCTORS ON WHICH THE RESISTCTORS ON WHICH THE RESIST ANCE OF AANCE OF AANCE OF AANCE OF AANCE OF A
CONDUCTOR DEPENDSCONDUCTOR DEPENDSCONDUCTOR DEPENDSCONDUCTOR DEPENDSCONDUCTOR DEPENDSComplete the cir cuit by connecting the nichr ome wir e in the gap XY . Plug the key. Note
down the ammeter reading. Take out the key from the plug. [Note: Always take out the key
from the plug after measuring the current through the circuit. ]
Replace the nichrome wire with the torch bulb in the circuit and find the current through
it by measuring the r eading of the ammeter .
Now r epeat the above step with the W bulb in the gap XY .
Are the ammeter readings different for different components connected in the gap XY?
What do the above observations indicate?
You may r epeat this ammeter readings in each case. Analyse the observations.
Complete an electric cir cuit consisting of a cell, an ammeter , a nichrome wir e of length l
[say, marked ()]
and a plug key, as shown in Fig. .
the length of the wire is doubled. The ammeter reading is increased when
a thicker wire of the same material and of the same length is used in the
circuit. A change in ammeter reading is observed when a wire of different
material of the same length and the same area of cross-section is used.
On applying Ohm’s law [Eqs. (.) – (.)], we observe that the
resistance of the conductor depends (i) on its length, (ii) on its area of
cross-section, and (iii) on the nature of its material. Precise measurements
have shown that resistance of a uniform metallic conductor is directly
proportional to its length (l ) and inversely proportional to the area of
cross-section ( A). That is,
R ∝ l (.)
and R ∝ /A (.)
Combining Eqs. (.) and (.) we get
R ∝ l
A
or, R = ρl
A(.)
where ρ (rho) is a constant of proportionality and is called the electrical
resistivity of the material of the conductor . The SI unit of r esistivity is
Ω m. It is a characteristic property of the material. The metals and alloysNow, plug the key. Note the curr ent in the ammeter .
Replace the nichrome wire by another nichrome wire of same thickness but twice the
length, that is l [marked () in the Fig. .].
Note the ammeter reading.
Now replace the wire by a thicker nichrome wire, of the same length l [marked ()]. A
thicker wire has a larger cross-sectional area. Again note down the current through the
circuit.
Instead of taking a nichrome wire, connect a copper wire [marked () in Fig. .] in the
circuit. Let the wire be of the same length and same area of cross-section as that of the
first nichrome wire [marked ()]. Note the value of the current.
Notice the difference in the current in all cases.
Does the current depend on the length of the conductor?
Does the current depend on the area of cross-section of the wire used?
Electricity 179have very low resistivity in the range of – Ω m to – Ω m. They are
good conductors of electricity. Insulators like rubber and glass have
resistivity of the order of to Ω m. Both the resistance and
resistivity of a material vary with temperature.
Table . reveals that the resistivity of an alloy is generally higher
than that of its constituent metals. Alloys do not oxidise (burn) readily
at high temperatures. For this reason, they are commonly used in
electrical heating devices, like electric iron, toasters etc. Tungsten is used
almost exclusively for filaments of electric bulbs, whereas copper and
aluminium are generally used for electrical transmission lines.
Table . Electrical resistivity* of some substances at °C
Material Resistivity ( ΩΩΩ
ΩΩ m)
Conductors Silver . × –
Copper . × –
Aluminium . × –
Tungsten . × –
Nickel . × –
Iron . × –
Chromium . × –
Mercury . × –
Manganese . × –
Alloys Constantan × –
(alloy of Cu and Ni)
Manganin × –
(alloy of Cu, Mn and Ni)
Nichrome × –
(alloy of Ni, Cr, Mn and Fe)
Insulators Glass –
Hard rubber –
Ebonite –
Diamond -
Paper (dry)
* You need not memorise these values. Y ou can use these values for solving numerical
problems.
Example .
(a)How much current will an electric bulb draw from a V source,
if the resistance of the bulb filament is Ω ? (b) How much
current will an electric heater coil draw from a V source, if
the resistance of the heater coil is Ω?
Solution
(a)We are given V = V ; R = Ω.
From Eq. (.), we have the current I = V/ Ω = . A.
(b)We are given, V = V , R = Ω.
From Eq. (.), we have the current I = V/ Ω = . A.
Note the difference of current drawn by an electric bulb and electric
heater from the same V source!
The potential difference between the terminals of an electric heater
is V when it draws a current of A from the source. What current
will the heater draw if the potential difference is increased to V?
Solution
We are given, potential dif ference V = V , curr ent I = A.
According to Ohm’s law, V= = AVRI= Ω.
When the potential difference is increased to V the current is
given by
current = V= = A15 V
R Ω.
The current through the heater becomes A.
Example .
Resistance of a metal wire of length m is Ω at °C. If the
diameter of the wire is . mm, what will be the resistivity of the
metal at that temperature? Using Table ., predict the material
of the wire.
Solution
We are given the resistance R of the wir
e = Ω , the diameter
d = . mm = × - m, and the length l of the wire = m.
Therefore, from Eq. (.), the resistivity of the given metallic wire is
ρ= (RA/l) = (R πd2/4l)
Substitution of values in this gives
ρ= . × – Ω m
The resistivity of the metal at °C is . × – Ω m. From
Table ., we see that this is the resistivity of manganese.
Example .
A wire of given material having length l and area of cross-section A
has a resistance of Ω. What would be the resistance of another wire
of the same material having length l/ and area of cross-section A?
Solution
For first wire
R1ρ=l
A= 4Ω
Now for second wire
R2ρ/=2l
A ρ =
4l
A
R21=4R1
R2= 1Ω
The r esistance of the new wir e is Ω.
Electricity 181QUESTIONS
?. On what factors does the resistance of a
conductor depend?
. Will current flow more easily through a thick
wire or a thin wire of the same material, when
connected to the same source? Why?
. Let the resistance of an electrical component
remains constant while the potential difference
across the two ends of the component
decreases to half of its former value. What
change will occur in the current through it?
. Why are coils of electric toasters and electric
irons made of an alloy rather than a pure
metal?
. Use the data in Table . to answer the
following –
(a)Which among iron and mercury is a better
conductor?
(b)Which material is the best conductor?
. RESIST11. RESIST11. RESIST11. RESIST11. RESIST ANCE OF A SYSTEM OF RESISTORSANCE OF A SYSTEM OF RESISTORSANCE OF A SYSTEM OF RESISTORSANCE OF A SYSTEM OF RESISTORSANCE OF A SYSTEM OF RESISTORS
In preceding sections, we lear nt about some simple electric cir cuits. W e
have noticed how the current through a conductor depends upon its
resistance and the potential difference across its ends. In various electrical
gadgets, we often use resistors in various combinations. W e now ther efore
intend to see how Ohm’s law can be applied to combinations of resistors.
There are two methods of joining the r esistors together . Figur e .
shows an electric circuit in which three resistors having resistances R1,
R2 and R3, respectively, are joined end to end. Here the resistors are said
to be connected in series.
You will observe that the value of the current in the ammeter is the
same, independent of its position in the electric circuit. It means that in
a series combination of resistors the current is the same in every part of
the cir cuit or the same curr ent thr ough each r esistor .Join three resistors of different values in series. Connect them
with a battery, an ammeter and a plug key, as shown in Fig. .
You may use the r esistors of values like Ω, Ω, Ω etc., and a
battery of V for performing this Plug the key. Note the ammeter reading.
Change the position of ammeter to anywhere in between the
resistors. Note the ammeter reading each time.
Do you find any change in the value of current through the
ammeter?. Resistors in Series
What happens to the value of current when a number of resistors are
connected in series in a circuit? What would be their equivalent
resistance? Let us try to understand these with the help of the following
activities.are connected together between points X and Y . Here, the r esistors ar e
said to be connected in parallel.
Electricity 183In series combination of three resistors, as shown in Fig. .
Plug the key in the circuit and note the voltmeter reading. It
gives the potential difference across the series combination of
resistors. Let it be V. Now measur e the potential dif ference acr oss
the two terminals of the battery. Compare the two values.
Take out the plug key and disconnect the voltmeter . Now insert
the voltmeter acr oss the ends X and P of the first r esistor , as
shown in Fig. .
Plug the key and measure the potential difference across the first
resistor . Let it be V1.
Similarly, measure the potential difference across the other two
resistors, separately. Let these values be V2 and V3, respectively.
Deduce a relationship between V, V1, V2 and V3.
You will observe that the potential dif ference V is equal to the sum of
potential differences V1, V2, and V3. That is the total potential difference
across a combination of resistors in series is equal to the sum of potential
difference across the individual resistors. That is,
V = V1 + V2 + V3(.)
In the electric circuit shown in Fig. ., let I be the current through
the circuit. The current through each resistor is also I. It is possible to
replace the three resistors joined in series by an equivalent single resistor
of resistance
R, such that the potential difference V across it, and the
current I through the circuit remains the same. Applying the Ohm’s law
to the entire circuit, we have
V = I R (.)
have
V1=I R1[.(a)]
V2=I R2[.(b)]
and V3=I R3[.(c)]
From Eq. (.),
I R= I R1 + I R2 + I R3
or
Rs= R1 +R2 + R3(.)
We can conclude that when several r esistors ar e joined in series, the
resistance of the combination Rs equals the sum of their individual
resistances, R1, R2, R3, and is thus greater than any individual resistance.
Example .
An electric lamp, whose resistance is Ω, and a conductor of Ω
resistance are connected to a V battery (Fig. .). Calculate (a) the
total resistance of the circuit, (b) the current through the circuit, and (c)
the potential dif ference acr oss the electric lamp and conductor .
Solution
The resistance of electric lamp, R1 = Ω ,
The r esistance of the conductor connected in series, R2 = Ω.
Then the total resistance in the circuit
R=R1 + R2
Rs= Ω
+ Ω = Ω.
The total potential difference across the two terminals of the battery
V = V .
Now by Ohm’s law, the current through the circuit is given by
I=V/Rs
= V/ Ω
=. A.a resistor of Ω to a V battery
Electricity 185Applying Ohm’s law to the electric lamp and conductor separately,
we get potential difference across the electric lamp,
V1= Ω × . A
= V;
and,
that acr oss the conductor , V2 = Ω × . A
= V .
Suppose that we like to replace the series combination of electric
lamp and conductor by a single and equivalent r esistor . Its resistance
must be such that a potential difference of V across the battery
terminals will cause a current of . A in the circuit. The resistance
R of this equivalent resistor would be
R=V/I
= V/ . A
= Ω.
This is the total resistance of the series circuit; it is equal to the sum
of the two resistances.
?. Draw a schematic diagram of a circuit consisting of a battery of three
cells of V each, a Ω resistor , an Ω resistor , and a Ω resistor , and
a plug key, all connected in series.
. Redraw the circuit of Question , putting in an ammeter to measure
the current through the resistors and a voltmeter to measure the
potential dif ference acr oss the Ω resistor . What would be the r eadings
in the ammeter and the voltmeter?
. Resistors in Parallel
Now, let us consider the arrangement of three resistors joined in parallel
with a combination of cells (or a battery), as shown in Fig.
Make a parallel combination, XY, of three
resistors having resistances R1, R2, and R3,
respectively. Connect it with a battery, a
plug key and an ammeter , as shown in
Fig. . Also connect a voltmeter in
parallel with the combination of resistors.
Plug the key and note the ammeter reading.
Let the current be I. Also take the voltmeter
reading. It gives the potential difference V,
across the combination. The potential
difference acr oss each r esistor is also V. This
can be checked by connecting the voltmeter
across each individual resistor (see
Fig. .).
Insert the ammeter in series with the resistor R1, as shown in Fig. . Note the ammeter
reading, I1.
Similarly, measure the currents through R2 and R3. Let these be I2 and I3, respectively.
What is the relationship between I, I1, I2 and I3?
It is observed that the total current I , is equal to the sum of the
separate currents through each branch of the combination.
I = I1 + I2 + I3(.)
Let Rp be the equivalent resistance of the parallel combination of
resistors. By applying Ohm’s law to the parallel combination of resistors,
we have
I = V/Rp(.)
On applying Ohm’s law to each r esistor , we have
I1 = V /R1; I2 = V /R2; and I3 = V /R3(.)
From Eqs. (.) to (.), we have
V/Rp = V/R1 + V/R2 + V/R3
or
/Rp = /R1 + /R2 + /R3(.)
Thus, we may conclude that the reciprocal of the equivalent resistance
of a group of resistances joined in parallel is equal to the sum of the
reciprocals of the individual resistances.
Example .
In the circuit diagram given in Fig. ., suppose the resistors R1,
R2 and R3 have the values Ω, Ω, Ω, respectively, which have
been connected to a battery of V . Calculate (a) the curr ent thr ough
each r esistor , (b) the total curr ent in the cir cuit, and (c) the total cir cuit
resistance.
Solution
R1 = Ω, R2 = Ω, and R3 = Ω.
Potential dif ference acr oss the battery, V = V .
This is also the potential difference across each of the individual
resistor; therefore, to calculate the current in the resistors, we use
Ohm’s law.
The current I1, through
R1 = V/ R1
I1= V/ Ω = . A.
Electricity 187The current I2, through R2=V/ R2
I2= V/ Ω=. A.
The current I3, through R3=V/R3
I3= V/ Ω=. A.
The total current in the circuit,
I= I1 + I2 + I3
=(. + . + .) A
= A
The total resistance Rp, is given by [Eq. (.)] 3pR= + + =
Thus, Rp = Ω.
Example .
If in Fig. ., R1 = Ω, R2 = Ω, R3 = Ω, R4 = Ω, R5 = Ω,
and a V battery is connected to the arrangement. Calculate
(a) the total resistance in the circuit, and (b) the total current flowing
in the circuit.
Solution
Suppose we replace the parallel resistors R1 and R2 by an
equivalent resistor of resistance, R′. Similarly we replace
the parallel resistors R3, R4 and R5 by an equivalent single
resistor of resistance R″. Then using Eq. (.), we have
/ R′ = / + / =/; that is R′ = Ω .
Similarly, / R″=/ + / + / = /;
that is, R″ = Ω.
Thus, the total resistance, R = R′ + R″ = Ω.
To calculate the current, we use Ohm’s law, and get
I = V/R = V/ Ω = . A.
We have seen that in a series cir cuit the curr ent is constant
throughout the electric circuit. Thus it is obviously impracticable to
connect an electric bulb and an electric heater in series, because they
need currents of widely different values to operate properly (see Example
.). Another major disadvantage of a series circuit is that when one
component fails the circuit is broken and none of the components works.
If you have used ‘fairy lights’ to decorate buildings on festivals, on
marriage celebrations etc., you might have seen the electrician spending
lot of time in trouble-locating and replacing the ‘dead’ bulb – each has
to be tested to find which has fused or gone. On the other hand, a parallel
circuit divides the current through the electrical gadgets. The total
resistance in a parallel circuit is decreased as per Eq. (.). This is
helpful particularly when each gadget has different resistance and
requires different current to operate properly.An electric circuit showing
the combination of series
and parallel resistors
We know that a battery or a cell is a sour ce of electrical ener gy. The
chemical reaction within the cell generates the potential difference between
its two terminals that sets the electrons in motion to flow the current
through a r esistor or a system of r esistors connected to the battery. W e
have also seen, in Section ., that to maintain the current, the source
has to keep expending its energy. Where does this energy go? A part of
the source energy in maintaining the current may be consumed into
useful work (like in rotating the blades of an electric fan). Rest of the
source energy may be expended in heat to raise the temperature of
gadget. W e often observe this in our everyday life. For example, an electric
fan becomes warm if used continuously for longer time etc. On the other
hand, if the electric circuit is purely resistive, that is, a configuration of
resistors only connected to a battery; the source energy continually gets
dissipated entirely in the form of heat. This is known as the heating
effect of electric current. This effect is utilised in devices such as electric
heater , electric ir on etc.
Consider a current
I flowing through a resistor of resistance R . Let
the potential difference across it be V (Fig. .). Let t be the time during
which a charge Q flows across. The work done in moving the charge Q
through a potential difference V is VQ. Therefore, the source must supply
energy equal to VQ in time t. Hence the power input to the circuit by the
source is
P V VI =Q
t= (.)
Or the energy supplied to the circuit by the source in time t is P ×
t,
that is, VIt. What happens to this energy expended by the source? This
energy gets dissipated in the resistor as heat. Thus for a steady
current I, the amount of heat H produced in time t is
H = VIt (.)?. Judge the equivalent resistance when the following are connected in
parallel – (a) Ω and Ω, (b) Ω and Ω, and Ω.
. An electric lamp of Ω, a toaster of resistance Ω, and a water
filter of resistance Ω are connected in parallel to a V source.
What is the resistance of an electric iron connected to the same source
that takes as much current as all three appliances, and what is the
current through it?
. What are the advantages of connecting electrical devices in parallel
with the battery instead of connecting them in series?
. How can three resistors of resistances Ω, Ω, and Ω be connected
to give a total resistance of (a) Ω, (b) Ω?
. What is (a) the highest, (b) the lowest total resistance that can be secured
by combinations of four coils of resistance Ω, Ω, Ω, Ω?
Electricity 189Applying Ohm’s law [Eq. (.)], we get
H = I2 Rt (.)
This is known as Joule’s law of heating. The
law implies that heat produced in a resistor is
(i) directly proportional to the square of current
for a given resistance, (ii) directly proportional to
resistance for a given current, and (iii) directly
proportional to the time for which the current flows
through the r esistor . In practical situations, when
an electric appliance is connected to a known
voltage source, Eq. (.) is used after
calculating the current through it, using the
relation I = V/R .
Example .
An electric iron consumes energy at a rate of W when heating is
at the maximum rate and W when the heating is at the minimum.
The voltage is V . What ar e the curr ent and the r esistance in each
case?
Solution
From Eq. (.), we know that the power input is
P = V I
Thus the current I = P/V
(a)When heating is at the maximum rate,
I = W/ V = . A;
and the resistance of the electric iron is
R = V/I = V/. A = . Ω.
(b)When heating is at the minimum rate,
I = W/ V = . A;
and the resistance of the electric iron is
R = V/I = V/. A = . Ω.
Example .
J of heat is produced each second in a Ω resistance. Find the
potential dif ference acr oss the r esistor .
Solution
H = J, R = Ω, t = s, V = ?
From Eq. (.) we have the current through the resistor as
I = √(H/Rt )
= √
[ J/( Ω × s)]
= A
Thus the potential dif ference acr oss the r esistor , V [from Eq. (.)] is
V=IR
= A × Ω
= V.A steady current in a purely resistive electric circuit
Electric Current
The generation of heat in a conductor is an inevitable consequence of
electric current. In many cases, it is undesirable as it converts useful
electrical energy into heat. In electric circuits, the unavoidable heating
can increase the temperature of the components and alter their properties.
However , heating ef fect of electric curr ent has many useful applications.
The electric laundry ir on, electric toaster , electric oven, electric kettle
and electric heater are some of the familiar devices based on Joule’s
heating.
The electric heating is also used to produce light, as in an electric
bulb. Here, the filament must retain as much of the heat generated as is
possible, so that it gets very hot and emits light. It must not melt at such
high temperature. A strong metal with high melting point such as
tungsten (melting point °C) is used for making bulb filaments. The
filament should be thermally isolated as much as possible, using
insulating support, etc. The bulbs are usually filled with chemically
inactive nitrogen and argon gases to prolong the life of filament. Most of
the power consumed by the filament appears as heat, but a small part
of it is in the form of light radiated.
Another common application of Joule’s heating is the fuse used in
electric circuits. It protects circuits and appliances by stopping the flow
of any unduly high electric current. The fuse is placed in series with
the device. It consists of a piece of wire made of a metal or an alloy of
appropriate melting point, for example aluminium, copper , iron, lead
etc. If a current larger than the specified value flows through the circuit,
the temperature of the fuse wire increases. This melts the fuse wire and
breaks the circuit. The fuse wire is usually encased in a cartridge of
porcelain or similar material with metal ends. The fuses used for domestic
purposes are rated as A, A, A, A, A, etc. For an electric iron
which consumes kW electric power when operated at V, a current
of (/) A, that is, . A will flow in the circuit. In this case, a A
fuse must be used.?. Why does the cord of an electric heater not glow while the heating element
does?
. Compute the heat generated while transferring coulomb of charge
in one hour thr ough a potential dif ference of V .
. An electric iron of resistance Ω takes a current of A. Calculate the
heat developed in s.
Electricity . ELECTRIC POWER11. ELECTRIC POWER11. ELECTRIC POWER11. ELECTRIC POWER11. ELECTRIC POWER
You have studied in your earlier Class that the rate of doing work is
power . This is also the rate of consumption of ener gy.
Equation (.) gives the rate at which electric energy is dissipated
or consumed in an electric cir cuit. This is also ter med as electric power .
The power P is given by
P = VI
Or P = I2R = V2/R (.)
The SI unit of electric power is watt (W). It is the power consumed by
a device that carries A of current when operated at a potential difference
of V . Thus,
W = volt × ampere = V A (.)
The unit ‘watt’ is very small. Therefore, in actual practice we use a
much larger unit called ‘kilowatt’. It is equal to watts. Since electrical
energy is the product of power and time, the unit of electric energy is,
therefore, watt hour (W h). One watt hour is the energy consumed when
watt of power is used for hour . The commer cial unit of electric ener gy
is kilowatt hour (kW h), commonly known as ‘unit’.
kW h = watt × second
=. × watt second
=. × joule (J)More to Know!Many people think that electrons are consumed in an electric circuit. This is wrong!
We pay the electricity board or electric company to pr ovide ener gy to move electr ons
through the electric gadgets like electric bulb, fan and engines. W e pay for the ener gy
that we use.
Example .
An electric bulb is connected to a V generator . The curr ent is
. A. What is the power of the bulb?
Solution
P=VI
= V × . A
= J/s
= W .
Example .
An electric refrigerator rated W operates hour/day. What is
the cost of the energy to operate it for days at Rs . per kW h?
?. What determines the rate at which energy is delivered by a current?
. An electric motor takes A from a V line. Determine the power of
the motor and the energy consumed in h.
What y ou hav e learnt
A stream of electrons moving through a conductor constitutes an electric current.
Conventionally, the direction of current is taken opposite to the direction of flow of
electrons.
The SI unit of electric current is ampere.
To set the electrons in motion in an electric circuit, we use a cell or a battery. A cell
generates a potential difference across its terminals. It is measured in volts (V).
Resistance is a pr operty that r esists the flow of electr ons in a conductor . It contr ols
the magnitude of the current. The SI unit of resistance is ohm (Ω ).
Ohm’s law: The potential difference across the ends of a resistor is directly
proportional to the current through it, provided its temperature remains the same.
The resistance of a conductor depends directly on its length, inversely on its area of
cross-section, and also on the material of the conductor .
The equivalent resistance of several resistors in series is equal to the sum of
their individual resistances.
A set of resistors connected in parallel has an equivalent resistance
Rp given by
.
pR R R R= + + +
The electrical energy dissipated in a resistor is given by
W = V × I × t
The unit of power is watt (W). One watt of power is consumed when A of current
flows at a potential dif ference of V .
The commercial unit of electrical energy is kilowatt hour (kWh).
kW h = ,, J = . ×
J.Solution
The total energy consumed by the refrigerator in days would be
W × . hour/day × days = W h
= kW h
Thus the cost of energy to operate the refrigerator for days is
kW h × Rs . per kW h = Rs .
Electricity 193EXERCISES
.A piece of wire of resistance R is cut into five equal parts. These parts are then
connected in parallel. If the equivalent resistance of this combination is R′, then the
ratio R/R ′ is –
(a)/ (b) / (c) (d)
.Which of the following terms does not represent electrical power in a circuit?
(a)I2R (b) IR2(c) VI (d) V2/R
.An electric bulb is rated V and W . When it is operated on V , the
power consumed will be –
(a) W (b) W (c) W (d) W
.Two conducting wires of the same material and of equal lengths and equal diameters
are first connected in series and then parallel in a circuit across the same potential
difference. The ratio of heat produced in series and parallel combinations would be –
(a): (b) : (c) : (d) :
.How is a voltmeter connected in the circuit to measure the potential difference between
two points?
.A copper wire has diameter . mm and resistivity of . × – Ω m. What will be
the length of this wire to make its resistance Ω? How much does the resistance
change if the diameter is doubled?
.The values of current I flowing in a given resistor for the corresponding values of
potential difference V across the resistor are given below –
I (amperes) . . . . .
V (volts) . . . . .
Plot a graph between V and I and calculate the resistance of that resistor .
.When a V battery is connected acr oss an unknown r esistor , there is a curr ent
of . mA in the circuit. Find the value of the resistance of the r esistor .
.A battery of V is connected in series with r esistors of . Ω , . Ω , . Ω , . Ω
and Ω, respectively. How much current would flow through the Ω resistor?
.How many Ω resistors (in parallel) are required to carry A on a V line?
.Show how you would connect three resistors, each of resistance Ω , so that the
combination has a r esistance of (i) Ω , (ii) Ω .
.Several electric bulbs designed to be used on a V electric supply line, are
rated W . How many lamps can be connected in parallel with each other acr oss
the two wires of V line if the maximum allowable current is A?
.A hot plate of an electric oven connected to a V line has two resistance coils
A and B, each of Ω resistance, which may be used separately, in series, or in
parallel. What are the currents in the three cases?
.Compare the power used in the Ω resistor in each of the following circuits:
(i) a V battery in series with Ω and Ω resistors, and (ii) a V battery in parallel
with Ω and Ω resistors.
in parallel to electric mains supply. What current is drawn from the line if the supply
voltage is V?
.Which uses more energy, a W TV set in hr, or a W toaster in minutes?
.An electric heater of resistance Ω draws A from the service mains for hours.
Calculate the rate at which heat is developed in the heater.
.Explain the following.
(a) Why is the tungsten used almost exclusively for filament of electric lamps?
(b) Why are the conductors of electric heating devices, such as bread-toasters
and electric irons, made of an alloy rather than a pure metal?
(c) Why is the series arrangement not used for domestic circuits?
(d) How does the resistance of a wire vary with its area of cross-section?
(e) Why are copper and aluminium wires usually employed for electricity
transmission? Magnetic Effects of
Electric Current12 CHAPTER
In the previous Chapter on ‘Electricity’ we learnt about the heating
effects of electric current. What could be the other effects of electric
curr
ent? W e know that an electric current-carrying wir e behaves like a
magnet. Let us perform the following Take a straight thick copper wire and place it
between the points X and Y in an electric circuit,
as shown in Fig. . The wire XY is kept
perpendicular to the plane of paper .
Horizontally place a small compass near to this
copper wire. See the position of its needle.
Pass the current through the circuit by
inserting the key into the plug.
Observe the change in the position of the
compass needle.Compass needle is deflected on passing an electric
current through a metallic conductor
We see that the needle is deflected. What does it mean? It means that
the electric current through the copper wire has produced a magnetic
effect. Thus we can say that electricity and magnetism are linked to each
other . Then, what about the r everse possibility of an electric ef fect of
moving magnets? In this Chapter we will study magnetic fields and such
electr omagnetic ef fects. W e shall also study about electr omagnets which
involve the magnetic effect of electric current.
Hans Christian Oersted (–)
Hans Christian Oersted, one of the leading scientists of the 19th
century, played a crucial role in understanding electromagnetism . In
he accidentally discovered that a compass needle got deflected
when an electric current passed through a metallic wire placed nearby.
Through this observation Oersted showed that electricity and
magnetism were related phenomena. His research later created
technologies such as the radio, television and fiber optics. The unit of
magnetic field str ength is named the oersted in his honor .Resistor
Long straight
conductor
We are familiar with the fact that a compass needle gets deflected when
brought near a bar magnet. A compass needle is, in fact, a small bar
magnet. The ends of the compass needle point approximately towards
north and south directions. The end pointing towards north is called north
seeking or north pole. The other end that points towards south is called
south seeking or south pole. Through various activities we have observed
that like poles r epel, while unlike poles of magnets attract each other .
QUESTION
?. Why does a compass needle get deflected when brought near
a bar magnet?
Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing
board using some adhesive material.
Place a bar magnet in the centre of it.
Sprinkle some iron filings uniformly
around the bar magnet (Fig. .). A
salt-sprinkler may be used for this
purpose.
Now tap the board gently.
What do you observe?
Iron filings near the bar magnet align
themselves along the field lines.
The iron filings arrange themselves in a pattern as shown
Fig. . Why do the iron filings arrange in such a pattern? What does
this pattern demonstrate? The magnet exerts its influence in the region
surrounding it. Therefore the iron filings experience a force. The force
thus exerted makes iron filings to arrange in a pattern. The region
surrounding a magnet, in which the force of the magnet can be detected,
is said to have a magnetic field. The lines along which the iron filings
align themselves represent magnetic field lines.
Are there other ways of obtaining magnetic field lines around a bar
magnet? Y es, you can yourself draw the field lines of a bar magnet.
Take a small compass and a bar magnet.
Place the magnet on a sheet of white paper fixed on a drawing
board, using some adhesive material.
Mark the boundary of the magnet.
Place the compass near the north pole of the magnet. How does
it behave? The south pole of the needle points towards the north
pole of the magnet. The north pole of the compass is directed
away from the north pole of the magnet.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 197Magnetic field is a quantity that has both direction and magnitude.
The direction of the magnetic field is taken to be the direction in which a
north pole of the compass needle moves inside it. Therefore it is taken
by convention that the field lines emerge from north pole and merge at
the south pole (note the arrows marked on the field lines in Fig. .).
Inside the magnet, the direction of field lines is from its south pole to its
north pole. Thus the magnetic field lines are closed curves.
The relative strength of the magnetic field is shown by the degree of
closeness of the field lines. The field is str onger , that is, the for ce acting
on the pole of another magnet placed is greater where the field lines are
crowded (see Fig. .).
No two field-lines ar e found to cr oss each other . If they did, it would
mean that at the point of intersection, the compass needle would point
towards two directions, which is not possible.
.
. . MA MAMA MAMAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENTGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENTGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENTGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENTGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT --- --C CC CCARRYING ARRYINGARRYING ARRYINGARRYING
CONDUCTORCONDUCTORCONDUCTORCONDUCTORCONDUCTOR
In metallic conductor produces a magnetic field around it. In order to
find the direction of the field produced let us repeat the activity in the
following way –Drawing a magnetic field line with the help of a
compass needleMark the position of two ends of the needle.
Now move the needle to a new position
such that its south pole occupies the
position previously occupied by its north
pole.
In this way, proceed step by step till you
reach the south pole of the magnet as
shown in Fig. .
Join the points marked on the paper by a
smooth curve. This curve represents
a field line.
Repeat the above procedure and draw as
many lines as you can. Y ou will get a
pattern shown in Fig. . These lines
represent the magnetic field around the
magnet. These are known as magnetic
field lines.
Observe the deflection in the compass
needle as you move it along a field line.
The deflection increases as the needle is
moved towards the poles.
Field lines around a bar magnet
Conductor
What determines the pattern of the magnetic field generated by a current
through a conductor? Does the pattern depend on the shape of the
conductor? W e shall investigate this with an activity.
We shall first consider the patter n of the magnetic field ar ound a
straight conductor carrying current.Take a long straight copper wire, two or three cells of . V each, and a plug key. Connect
all of them in series as shown in Fig. . (a).
Place the straight wire parallel to and over a compass needle.
Plug the key in the circuit.
Observe the direction of deflection of the north pole of the needle. If the current flows from
north to south, as shown in Fig. . (a), the north pole of the compass needle would move
towards the east.
Replace the cell connections in the circuit as shown in Fig. . (b). This would result in
the change of the direction of current through the copper wire, that is, from south to
north.
Observe the change in the dir ection of deflection of the needle. Y ou will see that now the
needle moves in opposite direction, that is, towards the west [Fig. . (b)]. It means that
the direction of magnetic field produced by the electric current is also reversed.
needle. The deflection in the needle becomes opposite when the direction of the current is reversed.(a) (b)
Take a battery ( V), a variable resistance (or a rheostat), an
ammeter (– A), a plug key, connecting wires and a long straight
thick copper wire.
Insert the thick wire through the centre, normal to the plane of a
rectangular cardboard. Take care that the cardboard is fixed and
does not slide up or down.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 199What happens to the deflection of the compass needle placed at a
given point if the current in the copper wire is changed? To see this, vary
the curr ent in the wir
e. We find that the deflection in the needle also
changes. In fact, if the current is increased, the deflection also increases.
It indicates that the magnitude of the magnetic field produced at a given
point increases as the current through the wire increases.
What happens to the deflection of the needle if the compass is moved
away from the copper wire but the current through the wire remains the
same? To see this, now place the compass at a farther point from the
conducting wire (say at point Q). What change do you observe? W e see
that the deflection in the needle decreases. Thus the magnetic field
produced by a given current in the conductor decreases as the distance
from it increases. From Fig. ., it can be noticed that the concentric
circles representing the magnetic field around a current-carrying straight
wire become larger and larger as we move away from it.
. Right-Hand Thumb Rule
A convenient way of finding the direction of magnetic field associated
with a current-carrying conductor is given in Fig. .Connect the copper wire vertically between the
points X and Y, as shown in Fig. . (a), in
series with the battery, a plug and key.
Sprinkle some iron filings uniformly on the
cardboar d. (You may use a salt sprinkler for this
purpose.)
Keep the variable of the rheostat at a fixed
position and note the current through the
ammeter .
Close the key so that a current flows through
the wire. Ensure that the copper wire placed
between the points X and Y remains vertically
straight.
Gently tap the cardboard a few times. Observe
the patter n of the ir on filings. Y ou would find
that the iron filings align themselves showing
a pattern of concentric circles around the
copper wire (Fig. .).
What do these concentric circles represent?
They represent the magnetic field lines.
How can the direction of the magnetic field be
found? Place a compass at a point (say P) over
a circle. Observe the direction of the needle. The
direction of the north pole of the compass
needle would give the direction of the field lines
produced by the electric current through the
straight wir e at point P . Show the dir ection by
an arrow.
Does the direction of magnetic field lines get
reversed if the direction of current through the
straight copper wire is reversed? Check it.
(a) A pattern of concentric circles indicating
the field lines of a magnetic field around a
straight conducting wire. The arrows in the
circles show the direction of the field lines.
(b) A close up of the pattern obtained.(a)
(b)Variable
resistance
conductor in your right hand such that the thumb points towards
the direction of current. Then your fingers will wrap around the
conductor in the direction of the field lines of the magnetic field, as
shown in Fig. . This is known as the right-hand thumb rule *.
Example .
A current through a horizontal power line flows in east to west
direction. What is the direction of magnetic field at a point directly
below it and at a point directly above it?
Solution
The current is in the east-west direction. Applying the right-hand
thumb rule, we get that the magnetic field (at any point below or
above the wire) turns clockwise in a plane perpendicular to the wire,
when viewed from the east end, and anti-clockwise, when viewed
from the west end.Right-hand thumb rule
*This rule is also called Maxwell’s corkscrew rule. If we consider ourselves driving a
corkscrew in the direction of the current, then the direction of the rotation of
corkscrew is the direction of the magnetic field. Magnetic Field due to a Current through a
Circular Loop
We have so far observed the patter n of the magnetic field lines
produced around a current-carrying straight wire. Suppose
this straight wire is bent in the form of a circular loop and a
current is passed through it. How would the magnetic field
lines look like? W e know that the magnetic field pr
oduced
by a current-carrying straight wire depends inversely on the
distance from it. Similarly at every point of a current-carrying
circular loop, the concentric circles representing the magnetic
field around it would become larger and larger as we move
away from the wire (Fig. .). By the time we reach at the
centre of the circular loop, the arcs of these big circles would
appear as straight lines. Every point on the wire carrying
current would give rise to the magnetic field appearing as
straight lines at the center of the loop. By applying the right
hand rule, it is easy to check that every section of the wire
contributes to the magnetic field lines in the same direction
within the loop.Magnetic field lines of the field
produced by a current-carrying
circular loop?. Draw magnetic field lines around a bar magnet.
. List the properties of magnetic field lines.
. Why don’t two magnetic field lines intersect each other?
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 201We know that the magnetic field pr oduced by a curr ent-carrying
wire at a given point depends directly on the current passing through it.
Therefore, if there is a circular coil having n turns, the field produced is
n times as large as that produced by a single turn. This is because the
current in each circular turn has the same direction, and the field due to
each turn then just adds up.
Take a rectangular cardboard having two holes.
Insert a circular coil having large number of turns
through them, normal to the plane of the cardboard.
Connect the ends of the coil in series with a battery,
a key and a rheostat, as shown in Fig. .
Sprinkle iron filings uniformly on the cardboard.
Plug the key.
Tap the cardboard gently a few times. Note the
pattern of the iron filings that emerges on the
cardboard.Magnetic field produced by a current-
carrying circular coil.
. Magnetic Field due to a Current in a Solenoid
A coil of many circular turns of insulated copper wire wrapped
closely in the shape of a cylinder is called a solenoid. The pattern
of the magnetic field lines around a current-carrying solenoid is
shown in Fig. . Compare the pattern of the field with the
magnetic field around a bar magnet (Fig. .). Do they look
similar? Y es, they ar
e similar . In fact, one end of the solenoid
behaves as a magnetic north pole, while the other behaves as the
south pole. The field lines inside the solenoid are in the form of
parallel straight lines. This indicates that the magnetic field is
the same at all points inside the solenoid. That is, the field is
uniform inside the solenoid.
A strong magnetic field produced inside a solenoid can be
used to magnetise a piece of magnetic material, like soft iron,
when placed inside the coil (Fig. .). The magnet so formed is
called an electromagnet.Field lines of the magnetic field
through and around a current
carrying solenoid.
A current-carrying solenoid coil
is used to magnetise steel rod
inside it – an electromagnet.?. Consider a circular loop of wire lying in
the plane of the table. Let the current
pass through the loop clockwise. Apply
the right-hand rule to find out the
direction of the magnetic field inside
and outside the loop.
. The magnetic field in a given region is
uniform. Draw a diagram to represent it.
. . FORCE ON A CURRENTFORCE ON A CURRENTFORCE ON A CURRENTFORCE ON A CURRENTFORCE ON A CURRENT --- --C CC CCARRYING CONDUCTORARRYING CONDUCTORARRYING CONDUCTORARRYING CONDUCTORARRYING CONDUCTOR
IN A MAGNETIC FIELDIN A MAGNETIC FIELDIN A MAGNETIC FIELDIN A MAGNETIC FIELDIN A MAGNETIC FIELD
We have lear nt that an electric current flowing through a conductor
produces a magnetic field. The field so produced exerts a force on a
magnet placed in the vicinity of the conductor . French scientist Andre
Marie Ampere (–) suggested that the magnet must also exert
an equal and opposite for ce on the curr ent-carrying conductor . The for ce
due to a magnetic field acting on a current-carrying conductor can be
demonstrated through the following activity. Choose the correct option.
The magnetic field inside a long straight solenoid-carrying current
(a) is zero.
(b) decreases as we move towards its end.
(c) increases as we move towards its end.
(d) is the same at all points.
Take a small aluminium rod AB (of about cm). Using
two connecting wires suspend it horizontally from a
stand, as shown in Fig. .
Place a strong horse-shoe magnet in such a way that
the rod lies between the two poles with the magnetic
field directed upwards. For this put the north pole of
the magnet vertically below and south pole vertically
above the aluminium rod (Fig. .).
Connect the aluminium rod in series with a battery,
a key and a rheostat.
Now pass a current through the aluminium rod from
end B to end A.
What do you observe? It is observed that the rod is
displaced towar ds the left. Y ou will notice that the r od
gets displaced.
Reverse the direction of current flowing through the
rod and observe the direction of its displacement. It is
now towards the right.
Why does the rod get displaced?A current-carrying rod, AB, experiences
a force perpendicular to its length and
the magnetic field. Support for the
magnet is not shown here, for simplicity.
The displacement of the rod in the above activity suggests that a
force is exerted on the current-carrying aluminium rod when it is placed
in a magnetic field. It also suggests that the direction of force is also
reversed when the direction of current through the conductor is reversed.
Now change the direction of field to vertically downwards by
interchanging the two poles of the magnet. It is once again observed that
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 203the direction of force acting on the current-carrying rod gets reversed. It
shows that the direction of the force on the conductor depends upon the
direction of current and the direction of the magnetic field. Experiments
have shown that the displacement of the rod is largest (or the magnitude
of the force is the highest) when the direction of current is at right angles
to the direction of the magnetic field. In such a condition we can use a
simple rule to find the dir ection of the for ce on the conductor .
In direction of the current and that of the magnetic
field perpendicular to each other and found
that the force is perpendicular to both of them.
The three directions can be illustrated through
a simple rule, called Fleming’s left-hand rule.
According to this rule, stretch the thumb,
forefinger and middle finger of your left hand
such that they are mutually perpendicular
(Fig. .). If the first finger points in the
direction of magnetic field and the second
finger in the direction of current, then the
thumb will point in the direction of motion or
the for ce acting on the conductor .
Devices that use current-carrying conductors and magnetic fields
include electric motor , electric generator , loudspeakers, micr
ophones
and measuring instruments.
Example .
An electron enters a magnetic field at right angles to it, as shown
in Fig. . The direction of force acting on the electron will be
(a) to the right.
(b)to the left.
(c)out of the page.
(d)into the page.
Solution
Answer is option (d). The direction of force is perpendicular to the
direction of magnetic field and current as given by Fleming’s left hand
rule. Recall that the direction of current is taken opposite to the direction
of motion of electrons. The force is therefore directed into the page.Fleming’s left-hand rule
?. Which of the following property of a proton can change while it moves
freely in a magnetic field? (Ther e may be mor e than one corr ect answer .)
(a) mass (b) speed
(c) velocity (d) momentum
In our homes, we receive supply of electric power through a main supply
(also called mains), either supported through overhead electric poles or
by underground cables. One of the wires in this supply, usually with
red insulation cover , is called live wir e (or positive). Another wir e, with
black insulation, is called neutral wire (or negative). In our country, the
potential dif ference between the two is V .
At the meter -boar d in the house, these wir es pass into an electricity
meter through a main fuse. Through the main switch they are connected
to the line wires in the house. These wires supply electricity to separate
circuits within the house. Often, two separate circuits are used, one of
A current rating for appliances with higher power ratings such as
geysers, air coolers, etc. The other circuit is of A current rating for
bulbs, fans, etc. The earth wir e, which has insulation of gr een colour , is
usually connected to a metal plate deep in the earth near the house.
This is used as a safety measure, especially for those appliances that
have a metallic body, for example, electric pr
ess, toaster , table fan,
refrigerator , etc. The metallic body is connected to the earth wir e, which
provides a low-resistance conducting path for the current. Thus, it
ensures that any leakage of current to the metallic body of the appliance
keeps its potential to that of the earth, and the user may not get a severe
electric shock. In affected if (i) current in rod AB is increased; (ii) a stronger horse-shoe
magnet is used; and (iii) length of the rod AB is increased?
. A positively-charged particle (alpha-particle) projected towards west is
deflected towards north by a magnetic field. The direction of magnetic
field is
(a) towards south (b) towards east
(c) downward (d) upward
Magnetism in medicine
An electric current always produces a magnetic field. Even weak ion currents that
travel along the nerve cells in our body produce magnetic fields. When we touch
something, our nerves carry an electric impulse to the muscles we need to use. This
impulse produces a temporary magnetic field. These fields are very weak and are
about one-billionth of the earth’s magnetic field. Two main organs in the human
body where the magnetic field produced is significant , are the heart and the brain. The
magnetic field inside the body forms the basis of obtaining the images of different body
parts. This is done using a technique called Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Analysis
of these images helps in medical diagnosis. Magnetism has, thus, got important uses
in medicine.More to Know!
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 205A schematic diagram of one of the common domestic circuits
?domestic circuits. In each separate circuit, different appliances can be
connected across the live and neutral wires. Each appliance has a
separate switch to ‘ON’/‘OFF’ the flow of current through it. In order
that each appliance has equal potential difference, they are connected
parallel to each other .
Electric fuse is an important component of all domestic cir cuits. W e
have already studied the principle and working of a fuse in the previous
chapter (see Section .). A fuse in a circuit prevents damage to the
appliances and the circuit due to overloading. Overloading can occur
when the live wire and the neutral wire come into direct contact. (This
occurs when the insulation of wires is damaged or there is a fault in the
appliance.) In such a situation, the current in the circuit abruptly
increases. This is called short-circuiting. The use of an electric fuse
prevents the electric circuit and the appliance from a possible damage
by stopping the flow of unduly high electric current. The Joule heating
that takes place in the fuse melts it to break the electric circuit.
Overloading can also occur due to an accidental hike in the supply
voltage. Sometimes overloading is caused by connecting too many
appliances to a single socket.
. Name two safety measures commonly used in electric circuits and
appliances.
. An electric oven of kW power rating is operated in a domestic electric
circuit ( V) that has a current rating of A. What result do you
expect? Explain.
. What precaution should be taken to avoid the overloading of domestic
electric circuits?
A compass needle is a small magnet. Its one end, which points towards north, is
called a north pole, and the other end, which points towards south, is called a
south pole.
A magnetic field exists in the region surrounding a magnet, in which the force of
the magnet can be detected.
Field lines are used to represent a magnetic field. A field line is the path along
which a hypothetical free north pole would tend to move. The direction of the
magnetic field at a point is given by the direction that a north pole placed at that
point would take. Field lines are shown closer together where the magnetic field is
greater.
A metallic wire carrying an electric current has associated with it a magnetic field.
The field lines about the wire consist of a series of concentric circles whose direction
is given by the right-hand rule.
The pattern of the magnetic field around a conductor due to an electric current
flowing thr ough it depends on the shape of the conductor . The magnetic field of a
solenoid carrying a current is similar to that of a bar magnet.
An electromagnet consists of a core of soft iron wrapped around with a coil of
insulated copper wire.
A current-carrying conductor when placed in a magnetic field experiences a force.
If the direction of the field and that of the current are mutually perpendicular to
each other , then the for ce acting on the conductor will be perpendicular to both
and will be given by Fleming’s left-hand rule.
In our houses we receive AC electric power of V with a frequency of Hz. One
of the wires in this supply is with red insulation, called live wire. The other one is of
black insulation, which is a neutral wire. The potential difference between the two
is V . The thir d is the earth wir e that has gr een insulation and this is connected
to a metallic body deep inside earth. It is used as a safety measure to ensure that
any leakage of curr ent to a metallic body does not give any sever e shock to a user .
Fuse is the most important safety device, used for protecting the circuits due to
short-circuiting or overloading of the circuits.
Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 207EXERCISES
.Which of the following correctly describes the magnetic field near a long
straight wire?
(a) The field consists of straight lines perpendicular to the wire.
(b) The field consists of straight lines parallel to the wire.
(c) The field consists of radial lines originating from the wire.
(d) The field consists of concentric circles centred on the wire.
.At the time of short circuit, the current in the circuit
(a) reduces substantially.
(b) does not change.
(c) increases heavily.
(d) vary continuously.
.State whether the following statements are true or false.
(a) The field at the centre of a long circular coil carrying current will be
parallel straight lines.
(b) A wire with a green insulation is usually the live wire of an electric supply.
.List two methods of producing magnetic fields.
.When is the force experienced by a curren t–carrying conductor placed in a magnetic
field largest?
.Imagine that you are sitting in a chamber with your back to one wall. An electron
beam, moving horizontally from back wall towards the front wall, is deflected by a
strong magnetic field to your right side. What is the direction of magnetic field?
.State the rule to determine the direction of a (i) magnetic field produced around a
straight conductor -carrying curr ent, (ii) for
ce experienced by a curr ent-carrying
straight conductor placed in a magnetic field which is perpendicular to it, and
(iii) current induced in a coil due to its rotation in a magnetic field.
.When does an electric short circuit occur?
.What is the function of an earth wire? Why is it necessary to earth metallic
appliances? We have hear d the wor d ‘envir onment’ often being used on the
television, in newspapers and by people around us. Our elders tell
us that the ‘environment’ is not what it used to be earlier; others say that
we should work in a healthy ‘environment’; and global summits involving
the developed and developing countries are regularly held to discuss
‘envir onmental’ issues. In this chapter , we shall be studying how various
components in the environment interact with each other and how we
impact the environment.
. ECO13. ECO13. ECO
. ECO13. ECO -SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA-SYSTEM — WHA T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?T ARE ITS COMPONENTS?
All organisms such as plants, animals, microorganisms and human
beings as well as the physical surroundings interact with each other
and maintain a balance in nature. All the interacting organisms in an
area together with the non-living constituents of the environment form
an ecosystem. Thus, an ecosystem consists of biotic components
comprising living organisms and abiotic components comprising
physical factors like temperature, rainfall, wind, soil and minerals.
For example, if you visit a garden you will find different plants, such
as grasses, trees; flower bearing plants like rose, jasmine, sunflower;
and animals like frogs, insects and birds. All these living organisms
interact with each other and their growth, reproduction and other
activities are affected by the abiotic components of ecosystem. So a garden
is an ecosystem. Other types of ecosystems are forests, ponds and lakes.
These are natural ecosystems while gardens and crop-fields are human-
made (artificial) ecosystems.
You might have seen an aquarium. Let us try to design one.
What are the things that we need to keep in mind when we create
an aquarium? The fish would need a free space for swimming (it
could be a lar ge jar), water , oxygen and food.
We can pr ovide oxygen thr ough an oxygen pump (aerator) and
fish food which is available in the market.
Our Environment 209If we add a few aquatic plants and animals it can become a self-
sustaining system. Can you think how this happens? An aquarium
is an example of a human-made ecosystem.
Can we leave the aquarium as such after we set it up? Why does
it have to be cleaned once in a while? Do we have to clean ponds
or lakes in the same manner? Why or why not?
We have seen in earlier classes that or ganisms can be gr ouped as
producers, consumers and decomposers according to the manner in
which they obtain their sustenance from the environment. Let us recall
what we have learnt through the self sustaining ecosystem created by
us above. Which organisms can make organic compounds like sugar
and starch from inorganic substances using the radiant energy of the
Sun in the presence of chlorophyll? All green plants and certain bacteria
which can produce food by photosynthesis come under this category
and are called the producers.
Organisms depend on the producers either directly or indirectly for
their sustenance? These organisms which consume the food produced,
either directly from producers or indirectly by feeding on other consumers
are the consumers. Consumers can be classed variously as herbivores,
carnivores, omnivores and parasites. Can you give examples for each of
these categories of consumers?
Imagine the situation where you do not clean the aquarium and
some fish and plants have died. Have you ever thought what
happens when an organism dies? The microorganisms, comprising
bacteria and fungi, break-down the dead remains and waste
products of organisms. These microorganisms are the decomposers
as they break-down the complex organic substances into simple
inorganic substances that go into the soil and are used up once
more by the plants. What will happen to the garbage, and dead
animals and plants in their absence? Will the natural replenishment
of the soil take place, even if decomposers are not there?
While creating an aquarium did you take care not to put an aquatic
animal which would eat others? What would have happened
otherwise?
Make groups and discuss how each of the above groups of
organisms ar e dependent on each other .
Write the aquatic or ganisms in or der of who eats whom and for m
a chain of at least three steps. → →
Would you consider any one gr oup of or ganisms to be of primary
importance? Why or why not?
Trophic levels13. F ood Chains and W ebs
In on one another . This series or or ganisms taking part at
various biotic levels form a food chain (Fig. .).
Each step or level of the food chain forms a trophic level.
The autotrophs or the producers are at the first trophic level.
They fix up the solar energy and make it available for
heterotrophs or the consumers. The herbivores or the primary
consumers come at the second, small carnivores or the
secondary consumers at the third and larger carnivores or
the tertiary consumers form the fourth trophic level (Fig. .).
We know that the food we eat acts as a fuel to pr
ovide us
energy to do work. Thus the interactions among various
components of the environment involves flow of energy from
one component of the system to another . As we have studied,
the autotrophs capture the energy present in sunlight and
convert it into chemical energy. This energy supports all the
activities of the living world. From autotrophs, the energy goes
to the heter otrophs and decomposers. However , as we saw in
the previous Chapter on ‘Sources of Energy’, when one form
of ener gy is changed to another , some ener gy is lost to the
environment in forms which cannot be used again. The flow
of energy between various components of the environment
has been extensively studied and it has been found that –
The green plants in a terrestrial ecosystem capture about
% of the energy of sunlight that falls on their leaves and convert it
into food energy.
When green plants are eaten by primary consumers, a great deal
of energy is lost as heat to the environment, some amount goes
into digestion and in doing work and the rest goes towards growth
and reproduction. An average of % of the food eaten is turned
into its own body and made available for the next level of
consumers.
Therefore, % can be taken as the average value for the amount
of organic matter that is present at each step and reaches the next
level of consumers.
Since so little energy is available for the next level of consumers,
food chains generally consist of only three or four steps. The loss
of energy at each step is so great that very little usable energy
remains after four trophic levels.
There are generally a greater number of individuals at the lower
trophic levels of an ecosystem, the greatest number is of the
producers.
The length and complexity of food chains vary greatly. Each organism
is generally eaten by two or more other kinds of organisms which in
turn are eaten by several other organisms. So instead of a straight
line food chain, the relationship can be shown as a series of branching
lines called a food web (Fig. .).Food chain in nature
(a) in forest, (b) in
grassland and (c) in a
pond
Our Environment 211From the energy flow diagram (Fig. .),
two things become clear . Firstly, the flow of
energy is unidirectional. The energy that is
captured by the autotrophs does not revert
back to the solar input and the energy which
passes to the herbivores does not come back
to autotrophs. As it moves progressively
through the various trophic levels it is no
longer available to the previous level.
Secondly, the energy available at each trophic
level gets diminished progressively due to loss
of energy at each level.
Another interesting aspect of food chain
is how unknowingly some harmful
chemicals enter our bodies through the food
chain. Y ou have read in Class IX how water
gets polluted. One of the reasons is the use of
several pesticides and other chemicals to
protect our crops from diseases and pests.
These chemicals are either washed down into
the soil or into the water bodies. From the
soil, these are absorbed by the plants along
with water and minerals, and from the water
bodies these are taken up by aquatic plants
Food web, consisting of
many food chains
As these chemicals are not degradable, these get accumulated
progressively at each trophic level. As human beings occupy the top
level in any food chain, the maximum concentration of these chemicals
get accumulated in our bodies. This phenomenon is known as biological
magnification. This is the reason why our food grains such as wheat
and rice, vegetables and fruits, and even meat, contain varying amounts
of pesticide residues. They cannot always be removed by washing or
other means.
?. What are trophic levels? Give an example of a food chain and state the
different trophic levels in it.
. What is the role of decomposers in the ecosystem?
.
. HOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THEHOW DO OUR ACTIVITIES AFFECT THE
ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?ENVIRONMENT?
We are an integral part of the envir onment. Changes in the envir onment
affect us and our activities change the envir onment ar ound us. W e have
already seen in Class IX how our activities pollute the environment. In
this chapter , we shall be looking at two of the environmental pr oblems
in detail, that is, depletion of the ozone layer and waste disposal.
. Ozone Layer and How it is Getting Depleted
Ozone (O3) is a molecule formed by three atoms of oxygen. While O2,
which we normally refer to as oxygen, is essential for all aerobic forms of
life. Ozone, is a deadly poison. However , at the higher levels of the
atmosphere, ozone performs an essential function. It shields the surface
of the earth from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. This radiationNewspaper reports about pesticide levels in ready-made food items
are often seen these days and some states have banned these
products. Debate in groups the need for such bans.
What do you think would be the source of pesticides in these food
items? Could pesticides get into our bodies from this source through
other food products too?
Discuss what methods could be applied to reduce our intake of
pesticides.
Our Environment 213is highly damaging to organisms, for example, it is known to cause skin
cancer in human beings.
Ozone at the higher levels of the atmosphere is a product of UV
radiation acting on oxygen (O2) molecule. The higher energy UV
radiations split apart some moleculer oxygen (O2) into free oxygen (O)
atoms. These atoms then combine with the molecular oxygen to form
ozone as shown—
O O+O2UV →
O O O2
Ozone )+ →
(
The amount of ozone in the atmosphere began to drop sharply in
the 1980s. This decrease has been linked to synthetic chemicals like
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which are used as refrigerants and in fire
extinguishers. In , the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) succeeded in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at
levels. It is now mandatory for all the manufacturing companies
to make CFC-free refrigerators throughout the world.
Collect waste material from your homes. This could include all
the waste generated during a day, like kitchen waste (spoilt food,
vegetable peels, used tea leaves, milk packets and empty cartons),
waste paper , empty medicine bottles/strips/bubble packs, old and
torn clothes and br oken footwear .
Bury this material in a pit in the school garden or if there is no
space available, you can collect the material in an old bucket/
flower pot and cover with at least cm of soil.
Keep this material moist and observe at -day intervals.
What are the materials that remain unchanged over long periods
of time?
What are the materials which change their form and structure
over time?
Of these materials that are changed, which ones change the fastest?Find out from the library, internet or newspaper reports, which
chemicals ar e responsible for the depletion of the ozone layer .
Find out if the regulations put in place to control the emission of
these chemicals have succeeded in reducing the damage to the
ozone layer . Has the size of the hole in the ozone layer changed in
recent years?
. Managing the Garbage we Produce
In our daily activities, we generate a lot of material that are thrown
away. What are some of these waste materials? What happens after we
throw them away? Let us perform an activity to find answers to these
questions.
digested by various enzymes in our body. Have you ever wondered why
the same enzyme does not break-down everything we eat? Enzymes are
specific in their action, specific enzymes are needed for the break-down
of a particular substance. That is why we will not get any energy if we
try to eat coal! Because of this, many human-made materials like plastics
will not be broken down by the action of bacteria or other saprophytes.
These materials will be acted upon by physical processes like heat and
pressure, but under the ambient conditions found in our environment,
these persist for a long time.
Substances that are broken down by biological processes are said
to be biodegradable. How many of the substances you buried were
biodegradable? Substances that are not broken down in this manner
are said to be non-biodegradable. These substances may be inert and
simply persist in the environment for a long time or may harm the various
members of the eco-system.
Use the library or internet to find out more about biodegradable
and non-biodegradable substances.
How long are various non-biodegradable substances expected to
last in our environment?
These days, new types of plastics which are said to be biodegradable
are available. Find out more about such materials and whether
they do or do not harm the environment.
. Why are some substances biodegradable and some non-biodegradable?
. Give any two ways in which biodegradable substances would affect the
environment.
. Give any two ways in which non-biodegradable substances would affect
the environment.?
Visit any town or city, and we are sure to find heaps of garbage all over
the place. Visit any place of tourist interest and we are sure to find the
place littered with empty food wrappers. In the earlier classes we have
talked about this problem of dealing with the garbage that we generate. Let
us now look at the problem a bit more deeply.
Our Environment 215Find out what happens to the waste generated at home. Is there a
system in place to collect this waste?
Find out how the local body ( panchayat , municipal corporation,
resident welfare association) deals with the waste. Are there
mechanisms in place to treat the biodegradable and non-
biodegradable wastes separately?
Calculate how much waste is generated at home in a day.
How much of this waste is biodegradable?
Calculate how much waste is generated in the classroom
in a day.
How much of this waste is biodegradable?
Suggest ways of dealing with this waste.
Improvements in our life-style have resulted in greater amounts of
waste material generation. Changes in attitude also have a role to play,
with more and more things we use becoming disposable. Changes in
packaging have resulted in much of our waste becoming non-
biodegradable. What do you think will be the impact of these on our
environment?Find out how the sewage in your locality is treated. Are there
mechanisms in place to ensure that local water bodies are not
polluted by untreated sewage.
Find out how the local industries in your locality treat their wastes.
Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that the soil and water
are not polluted by this waste?
Disposable cups in trains
If you ask your parents, they will probably remember a time when tea in trains was
served in plastic glasses which had to be r eturned to the vendor . The intr oduction of
disposable cups was hailed as a step forward for reasons of hygiene. No one at that time
perhaps thought about the impact caused by the disposal of millions of these cups on a
daily basis. Some time back,
kulhads , that is, disposable cups made of clay, were
suggested as an alternative. But a little thought showed that making these kulhads on
a large scale would result in the loss of the fertile top-soil. Now disposable paper -cups
are being used. What do you think are the advantages of disposable paper -cups over
disposable plastic cups?Think it over
Search the internet or library to find out what hazardous materials
have to be dealt with while disposing of electronic items. How would
these materials affect the environment?
Find out how plastics are recycled. Does the recycling process
have any impact on the environment?
?. What is ozone and how does it affect any ecosystem?
. How can you help in reducing the problem of waste disposal? Give
any two methods.
What y ou hav e learnt
The various components of an ecosystem are interdependent.
The producers make the energy from sunlight available to the rest of the ecosystem.
There is a loss of energy as we go from one trophic level to the next, this limits the
number of trophic levels in a food-chain.
Human activities have an impact on the environment.
The use of chemicals like CFCs has endanger ed the ozone layer . Since the ozone
layer protects against the ultraviolet radiation from the Sun, this could damage
the environment.
The waste we generate may be biodegradable or non-biodegradable.
The disposal of the waste we generate is causing serious environmental problems.
EXERCISES
.Which of the following groups contain only biodegradable items?
(a) Grass, flowers and leather
(b) Grass, wood and plastic
(c)Fruit-peels, cake and lime-juice
(d) Cake, wood and grass
.Which of the following constitute a food-chain?
(a) Grass, wheat and mango
(b) Grass, goat and human
Our Environment (c)Goat, cow and elephant
(d) Grass, fish and goat
.Which of the following are environment-friendly practices?
(a) Carrying cloth-bags to put purchases in while shopping
(b) Switching off unnecessary lights and fans
(c) Walking to school instead of getting your mother to dr op you on her scooter
(d) All of the above
.What will happen if we kill all the organisms in one trophic level?
.Will the impact of removing all the organisms in a trophic level be different for
different trophic levels? Can the organisms of any trophic level be removed without
causing any damage to the ecosystem?
.What is biological magnification? Will the levels of this magnification be different at
different levels of the ecosystem?
.What are the problems caused by the non-biodegradable wastes that we generate?
.If all the waste we generate is biodegradable, will this have no impact on the
environment?
.Why is damage to the ozone layer a cause for concern? What steps are being taken
to limit this damage?